Badiou最近文章
=============================
发布时间：2010-03-05 23:44
The Courage of the Present, by Alain Badiou
LE MONDE | 13.02.10 | 13h41
The present time, in a country like ours, since about thirty years ago, is a disoriented time. I
mean: a time which proposes nothing to is own youth, and singularly the popular youth
(jeunesse popular), no principle of orientation for existence.
What does ”disorientation” consist of, precisely? One of its important operations consists, in any
case, to render unreadable the previous sequence, the sequence which was very much
oriented. This operation is characteristic of all reactive, counter revolutionary periods, like that
we have been experiencing since the end of the 1970s.
We can note for example that the property of the Thermidorian reaction, after the conspiracy of
9 Thermidor and the execution without judgment of the great Jacobins, was to render
unreadable the preceding robespierrist sequence: the reduction of it to the pathology of certain
criminal blood-drinkers, prohibiting any political comprehension. This vision of things has
lasted decades, and it seeks to disorient the people on a permanent basis, a people we take, that
we will always take for virtually revolutionary.
To make a period (of time) unreadable, that's something else, something much more than simply
condemning it. For one of the effects of unreadability is to prohibit finding in the period in
question, apt principles for remedying its impasses. If the period is declared pathological, there
is nothing we can take from for the orientation itself, and the conclusion, whose deleterious
effects we state every day, is that it is necessary to resign oneself, as to the ”least evil”, to
disorientation.
We propose consequently, concerning a previous and visibly closed sequence of political
emancipation, that it must, for us, remain readable, and this independently of the final judgment
that one makes of it.
In the debate concerning the rationality of the French Revolution under the III Republic,
Clemenceau produced a celebrated formula: ”The French Revolution forms a Bloc”. This formula
is remarkable in that it declares the integral readability of the process, whatever the tragic
incidents of its development.
Today it is clear that, concerning communism, the ambient discourse transforms the previous
sequence into opaque pathology. I authorize myself to say that the communist sequence,
including all its nuances, of power as of opposition, which claim the same idea, forms itself a
bloc.
What could be then, today, the principle and the name of a true orientation＞ I propose in either
case to call it, out of fidelity to the history of politics of emancipation (des politiques
d'emancipation), the communist hypothesis.
Nothing in passing that our critics claim to through out the word ”communism” under the
pretext that an experience of state communism, which lasted 70 years, has tragically
failed. What a joke! When it concerns reversing the domination of the rich and the heredity of
power, which has lasted millennia, they object to 70 years of trial and error, of violence and
impasses! In truth, the communist idea has only covered the tiniest portion of its verification, of
its application.
What is this hypothesis? Three axioms.
First, the egalitarian idea. The common pessimist idea, which dominates once again our times, is
that human nature is fated to inequality, which is furthermore too bad that it is thusly, but after
having shed some tears, it is essential to convince oneself of it and accept it. To this, the
communist idea responds not exactly by the proposition of equality as program - achieving the
financial equality immanent to human nature - but in declaring that the egalitarian principle
permits distinguishing, in all collective action, that which is homogeneous to the communist
hypothesis, and therefore to a real value, and that which contradicts it, and therefore takes us to
an animal vision of humanity.
Then comes the conviction that the existence of a separate coercive state isn't necessary. This is
the thesis, common to anarchists and communists, of the withering of the state. There have been
societies without state, and it is rational to postulate that there can be others. But above all, one
can organize popular political action without being submitted to the idea of power, of
representation in the state, elections, etc.
The liberating constraint of organized action can exercise itself outside of the state. We have
numerous examples, including recent ones: the unexpected power of the movement in
December 1995 has held off, for a few years, anti-popular measures (mesures antipopulaires)
concerning retirement. The militant action of illegal workers has not held back a number of
villainous laws, but has permitted that they are largely recognized as a component of our
collective and political life.
Last axiom: the organization of work does not imply its division, the specialization of tasks, and
in particular the oppressive difference between intellectual and manual labor. We must aim for,
and we can, an essential polymorphism of human labor. This is the material base of the
disappearance of classes and social hierarchies.
These three principles do not constitute a program, but maxims of orientation, which anyone
can invest, as operator, for evaluating what he or she says or does, personally or collectively, in
his or her relation to the communist hypothesis.
The communist hypothesis has known two great stages, and I propose that we are entering a
third phase of its existence.
The communist hypothesis is instituted on a vast level between the revolutions of 1848 and the
Paris Commune. The dominant themes are those of the worker movement and
insurrection. Then there is a long interval, nearly forty years (1871-1905), which corresponds
to the apogee of european imperialism and the cutting into shapes of numerous regions of the
globe. The sequence which follows from 1905 to 1976 (Cultural Revolution in China) is the
second sequence of applying the communist hypothesis.
Its dominant theme is the theme of the party with its major (and unquestionable) slogan:
discipline is the only weapon of those who have nothing. From 1976 on, we have a second
period of reactive stabilization, a period in which we are still, and during which we have seen
notably the fall of socialist dictatorships with their unique parties created in the second
sequence.
My conviction is that it is unavoidable that a third sequence of the communist hypothesis will
open, different from the two preceding, but paradoxically closer to the first than the
second. This sequence will have at stake, in common with the sequence that prevailed during
the 19th century, the very existence of the communist hypothesis, today massively denied. We
can define, what with others I have attempted to do, preliminary works for the restoration of the
hypothesis and the deployment of its third age.
We need, in the very beginning of the third sequence of existence for the communist hypothesis,
a provisional morality for disoriented times. This means holding onto minimally a consistent
subjective figure, without having the support of the communist hypothesis which is not as yet
restored to a great scale. It's important to find a real point (point reel) on which we can hold at
whatever price, an ”impossible” point, un-inscribable in the law of the situation. We must hold
to a real point of this type and organize its consequences.
the key witness that our societies are clearly in-human is today the undocumented foreign
proletarian: he is the mark, immanent to our situation, that there is only one world. Treating the
foreign proletarian as coming from another world, voila the specific task assigned to the
”minister of national identity”, who disposes of his own police force (border police). To affirm,
against such a statist operation, that any undocumented worker is from the same world as
oneself, and to work through the practical, egalitarian, and militant consequences, voila, an
example-type of provisional morality, a local orientation homogeneous to the communist
hypothesis in the global disorientation in which solely its restoration can ward of.
The principle virtue we need is courage. This is not universally the case: in other circumstances,
other virtues could be of the utmost importance. Thus in the period of the revolutionary war in
china, it is patience which has been promoted by Mao as cardinal virtue. But today, it is
incontestably courage. Courage manifests itself without regard for the laws of the world, by the
endurance of the impossible. It means taking hold of the impossible point without taking into
consideration the ensemble of the situation: courage, when it concerns treating the point as
such, is a local virtue. It takes up a morality of the place (lieu), and has for horizon the slow
restoration of the communist hypothesis.
Translated by Michel Cioran
