BaudRILLARD：第三种暴力：图像和景观之暴力
=============================
发布时间：2010-11-25 22:50
 But now we have to deal with a violence of the third type, a very different one. More radical and subtle : the violence of deterrence, of consensus and esontrol, of hyperregulation and deregulation altogether - the violence of the virtual, a metaviolence in some way. Violence of forced consensus and interaction, which are like the plastic surgery of the social. Therapeutic, genetic, communica-tional and informational violence, but, first of all, NEW the violence of transparency, which tend to eradicate, by the way of prophylaxis, of physical and mental regu-lation, the very roots of evil, of negativity and singularity (including the ultimate form of singularity, which is death itself). Violence of a general extradition of conflict, of death. Violence which paradoxically puts an end to the violence itself, and which therefore cannot be balanced except with radical dene-gation, with pure abreaction to the whole state of things - a pure violence without object anymore, without determination. This is the typical violence of information, of media, of images, of the spectacular. Connected to a total visibility, a total elimination of secrecy. Be it of a psychological or mental, or of a neurological, biolo-gical or genetic order - soon we shall discover the gene of revolt, the center of violence in the brain, perhaps even the gene of resistance against genetic manipulation - biological brainwashing, brainstorming, brainlifting, with nothing left but recycled, whitewashed lobotomized people as in Clockwork Orange. At this point we should not speak of violence anymore, but rather of virulence. Inasmuch that it does not work frontally, mechanically, but by contiguity, by contamination, along chain reactions, breaking our secret immunities. And operating not just by a negative effect like the classical violence, but on the contrary by an excess of the positive, just as a cancerous cell proliferates by metastasis, by restless reproduction and an excess of vitality.
。。。I would say : the violence of the third type annihilates the violence of the first and second type - but at the price of a more virulent intrusion in the deep cells of our mental world. The same as for anti-biotics : they eradicate the agents of disease by reducing the general level of vitality.
。。。
Particularly in the case of all professional of press-images which testify of the real events. In making reality, even the most violent, emerge to the visible, it makes the real substance disappear. It is like the Myth of Eurydice : when Orpheus turns around to look at her, she vanishes and returns to hell. That is why, the more exponential the marketing of images is growing the more fantastically grows the indifference towards the real world. Finally, the real world becomes a useless function, a collection of phantom shapes and ghost events. We are not far from the silhouettes on the walls of the cave of Plato.
。。。To become an image, one has to give a visual object of his whole everyday life, of his possibilities, of his feelings and desires. He-has to keep no secrets and to interact permanently. Just here is the deepest violence, a violence done to the deepest core, to the hard core of the individual. 
。。。We disappear behind our images. No chance anymore that our images are stolen from us, that we must give up our secrets - because we no longer have any. That is at the same time the sign of our ultimate morality and of our total 
。。。Anyway, the theory itself, when it reaches its extrem limit, has no open face anymore - it becomes its own masque. It keeps the outlook of analysis, but it has secretly transfused to the other side, to the side the phenomena, of which there is nothing to say anymore. In this moment, the image appears with all its phenomenal power. The photographic image is born out of this phenomenal intuition of the world, following the analytical intuition - not as transcription, but as transmutat: of theory. That is,at least,my own eperience of the photographic image as a transtheoretical object. Not as an artistic or realistic activity,but as a becoming-image of the object,as becoming-image of the thought,as symbolic terminal for the analytic process,together with its resolution into an object existing for its own - neither real nor objective as soon as it becomes an image,the object raises no problems anymore,it is the immediate solution to whatis perfectly insoluble from the point of view of analysis Mutation, metamorphosis, anamorphosis maybe - poetictransference of the analytical situation : the ”punctual” which is at the core of the image becomes the ”contrapunctual” of the theory.
图像是理论的对位。
http://www.egs.edu/faculty/jean-baudrillard/articles/the-violence-of-the-image/
