Feyerabend:INTELLECTUAL ELITISM v. DEMOCRATIC RELATIVISM
=============================
发布时间：2009-11-09 22:48
 Alien traditions, it is replied, may have answers where Western intellectuals
have problems - but these answers cannot be taken seriously. Science,
technology, medicine and other institutions that have been developed in the
West are better than all alternatives, because they have results. This is why
their problems are real problems which must be taken seriously by everybody.
This reply, which many philosophers accept without hesitation, has
no rational basis. The sciences, it is said, are uniformly better than all
alternatives - but where is the evidence to support this claim? Where, for
example, are the control groups which show the uniform (and not only the
occasional) superiority of Western scientific medicine over the medicine of
the Nei ehing? Or over Hopi medicine? Such control groups need patients
that have been treated in the Hopi manner, or in the Chinese manner using
Hopi experts and experts in traditional Chinese medicine (rather than
Western physicians who have learned the one or the other exotic trick and
now already regard themselves as 'experts' in the alien art), but the
requested procedures are often against the law and are at any rate frowned
upon and sabotaged by the medical societies. Secondly, the reply assumes
what is to be shown, viz. standards that make the results of science
worthwhile. But a mystic who can leave his material body and meet God
Himself will hardly be impressed by the fact that thousands of people, using
billions of dollars of tax money, succeeded in putting two wrapped-up
bodies on a hot and dried-out stone, the moon, and he will deplore the
decrease and almost complete destruction of man's spiritual abilities that is
a result of the materialistic-scientific climate of our times. One may of
course ridicule such an observation - but one cannot remove it by using the
argument from scientific success. Difference in standards and values plays
an even greater role in medicine: Western 'scientific' medicine aims at the
smooth functioning of the body-machine no matter what its feelings or its
aesthetic appearance; other forms of medicine are interested in feelings,
intuitive abilities, special achievements＜,＞ prophecy, Shamanism, that
cannot be measured in materialistic terms.
Another objection to a democratic relativism is that we live in a scientific
age and have to adapt to it. The reply is, first, that this is not true - science
is by no means omnipresent - and, secondly, that even its omnipresence
cannot be regarded as an argument for acceptance: if a country is invaded
by locusts then it is useful to study their habits, but it would be quite
unreasonable to turn them into national deities.
The elitism attacked, so goes a further argument, does no harm, for
today everybody can in principle become a member of the elite: everybody
can become a scientist, a politician, a Great Thinker, even the President of
a University. However, one can become a member of the elite only if one
adopts its ideology and its habits: equality, including equality of women and
'racial' equality, does not mean equality of traditions; it means equality if
access to one particular tradition - the tradition of the White Man. White
Liberals supporting the demand for equality have opened the promised
land - but it is a promised land built according to their own specifications,
filled with their own favourite playthings and accessible only in accordance
with their particular requirements (cf. the importance of 'intelligence' tests
for access to all sorts of activities). 15
The most effective move against a democratic relativism - for we can
hardly speak of an argument - is emotional blackmail or, more correctly,
slander. For example, many critics raise the spectre of racism, Auschwitz,
terrorism, chaos. But democratic relativism denies the right of traditions to
impose their form of life on others, and it therefore recommends the
protection of traditions from interference from outside. Hopi medicine will
be protected from Western medico-fascism just as Jews will be protected
from the political fascism of the Anti-Semites. Nor is the fear of chaos
justified: the traditions whose independence we want to protect are usually
much stricter towards their members than is the protecting mechanism
towards the protected traditions. The belief that the institutions of a free
society should protect the individual and not traditions, is closely connected
with the liberal belief that individuals can exist and have properties worth
protecting independently of all traditions. The belief is correct to a certain
extent: a foetus already has individuality, it reacts towards its surroundings,
it contains the possibilities for a rich and rewarding life. What is not correct
is the assumption that preservation of these possibilities is a basic value
never to be overruled. Not even liberals make this assumption a basis of
their creed (not all liberals are pacifists). Besides, a foetus is not a fully
fledged human being; it needs a tradition to become that, and so traditions
do become the prime elements of society. Of course there will be cases
when the state rightfully interferes even with the internal business of the
traditions it contains (to prevent the spreading of infectious diseases, for
example), for as with every rule the rules of democratic relativism have
exceptions. The point is that in a democracy the nature and the placement
of the exceptions is determined by specially elected groups of citizens and
not by experts, and that these groups will choose a democratic relativism as
the basis on which the exceptions are imposed. The problem of education,
however (people may remain in execrable traditions because they do not
know better, hence we need a uniform and universal education) provides
an argument against the status quo, not for it: hardly any adherent of science,
of scientific medicine, of rational procedures has chosen this form of life
from among a variety of alternatives, the scientific point of view was
imposed by 'education', not chosen16 and the groups who want to leave the
fold and return to more traditional forms of life do so in full knowledge of
the splendours they are leaving behind: they have savoured the bouquet of
scientific rationalism and have found it wanting. We see that neither
arguments nor moral pressures can remove the democratic relativism that
was proposed at the beginning of the present section. And there are many
arguments in itsfavour. 17
The first argument, which I have already mentioned, is one of rights.
People have the right to live as they see fit. If there exists a tradition that has
religious reasons for rejecting certain forms of medical treatment (some
tribes in Central Africa do not want to be X-rayed because they do not
want their internal organs exposed to view), then no institution should be
permitted to force it to accept these forms. Conversely, if there is a tradition
that uses treatment contrary to the ideas of Western medicine, then no
institution should be permitted to force it to reject these forms, or to put
them at a disadvantage (no health insurance, for example, or no paid sick
leave). Science or rationalism, in this view, are instruments put at the
disposal of the people to be used by them as they see fit; they are not necessary
conditions of rationality, or citizenship, or life. Scientists are salesmen of
ideas and gadgets, they are not judges of Truth and Falsehood. Nor are
they High Priests of Right Living. I have already said that there are
exceptions to this rule, as there are to any rule. The point is that in a
democracy these exceptions are dealt with by democratic councils, and that
these councils take democratic relativism as their starting-point.
A second argument in favour of a democratic relativism is closely
connected with Mill's arguments for proliferation. A society that contains
many traditions side by side has much better means ofjudging each single
tradition than a monistic society. It enhances both the quality of the
traditions, and the maturity of its citizens. We can learn a lot from
'primitive' tribes about care for the aged, treatment of 'criminal' elements,
treatment of (behavioural) aberrations. We can observe the advantages of
direct knowledge over an 'objective' account that approaches its object in a
standardized and severely alienating way. For Montaigne and his followers
in the Enlightenment a study of savage cultures provided not only valuable
contributions to the understanding of man, it also put a mirror in front of
'civilized' man and exposed his shortcomings and vices. Today a look at the
lives of independent women can show us the barbarism that characterizes so
much of our man-made societies. Democratic relativism makes these
contrasts stand out and so enables everybody to learn from them in her or
his own way.
A third argument follows directly from the second. Scientific views are
not only incomplete, in that they omit important phenomena, they are
often erroneous at the very centre of their competence. Routine arguments
and routine procedures are based on assumptions which are inaccessible to
the research of the time and often turn out to be either false or nonsensical.
Examples are the views on space, time, and reality in eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century physics and astronomy, the materialism of most medical
researchers today, the crude empiricism that guided much of seventeenthand
eighteenth-century science and influenced even the debates about the
Darwinian theory. These views are essential parts of important research
traditions, and yet only few practitioners know them and can talk about
them intelligently. And yet scientists show increased belligerence when the
views are attacked, and they throw their whole authority behind ideas they
can neither formulate nor defend: who does not remember how vigorously
some scientists have defended a rather naIve form of empiricism without
even being able to say what facts are or why anyone should take them
seriously. The lesson to be learned from this phenomenon is thatjundamental
debates between traditions are debates between laymen which can and should be settled
by no higher authority than again the authority iflaymen, i.e. democratic councils.
The situation just described is important in cases where the belief in the
soundness of a view or enterprise has led to institutional (and not only
intellectual) measures against alternatives. 'Scientific' medicine is a good
example. It is not a monolithic entity, it contains many departments,
schools, ideas, procedures and a good deal of dissension. However, there
are some widespread assumptions which influence research at many points
but are never subjected to criticism. One is the assumption that illnesses
are due to material disturbances which can be localized and identified as to
their chemico-physiological nature, and that the proper treatment consists
in removing them either by drugs or by surgery (including complex
methods of surgery such as laser surgery). The question is whether the
problems of scientific medicine - and there are many - have something to
do with this assumption, or whether their origin lies elsewhere. Everybody
knows that death rates in hospitals go down when doctors go on strike. Is
this due to the incompetence of the physicians, or does it show a basic fault
in the theoretical structure that guides their actions? Everybody knows that
cancer research absorbs huge amounts of money and has few results. 18 Is
this due to the fact that cancer researchers are mainly interested in theory,
not in healing, or does it indicate a basic fault of the theories used? We do
not know. To find out we must first make the basic assumptions (materialism,
for example) visible, and then examine them in a more direct
manner. To examine them in a more direct manner we have to compare
the results of scientific medicine with those of forms of medicine based on
entirely different principles. Democratic relativism permits and protects the
practice of such different forms of medicine. 19 It makes the needed
comparisons possible. Democratic relativism, therefore, not only supports a right,
it is also a most usiful research instrumentfor any tradition that accepts it.
