GGGG
=============================
发布时间：2010-05-24 00:19
 这一你正在过的生活，以及你过过的生活，这一你还将再过一次的生活，通读你还将去过无数次的生活里，将不会有任何新的东西，但每一种痛苦，每一种欢乐，每一次思想和叹息，一切难以说出地渺小或巨大的东西，都将不得不回到你身上，全照着一样的顺序----即使是树技间的这只蜘蛛和从上头洒下的月光，即使这一瞬间和我自己，也都将如此。存在的永恒的沙漏被一而再，再而三地倒置，夹带着你地，作为一抹尘埃地。
56
art ”is the highest task of man, the true metaphysical activity.”
Within the perspective of the surpassing of nihilism and the redemption of
chaos, Nietzsche suddenly situates art outside any aesthetic dimension and
thinks it within the circle of the eternal recurrence and of the will to power. In
this circle, art presents itself to Nietzsche's meditation as the fundamental trait
of the will to power, in which the essence of man and the essence of eternal
becoming are identical to each other. Nietzsche calls art this standing of man
within his metaphysical destiny. Art is the name he gives to the essential trait
of the will to power: the will that recognizes itself everywhere in the world and
feels every event as the fundamental trait of its character is what is
expressed, for Nietzsche, in the value art.
The proof that Nietzsche thinks of art as the original metaphysical power, that
his entire thought is, in this sense, a thought of art, is in a fragment from the
summer and fall of 1881: ”We want to have the experience of a work of art
anew each time! Thus we must mold life so as to have this same wish for
each of its parts! This is the main idea! Only at the end will the theory of the
repetition of everything that has existed be enunciated: only once the
tendency to create something that can bloom a hundred times better under
the sun of this theory has been inculcated!” 29 Only because he thinks of art in
this original dimension can Nietzsche say that ”art is worth more than truth”
and that ”we possess art lest we perish of the truth.” 30
57
Thus aesthetics is not simply the privileged dimension that progress in the
sensibility of Western man has reserved for the work of art as his most proper
place; it is, rather, the very destiny of art in the era in which, with tradition now
severed, man is no longer able to find, between past and future, the space of
the present, and gets lost in the linear time of history. The angel of history,
whose wings became caught in the storm of progress, and the angel of
aesthetics, who stares in an atemporal dimension at the ruins of the past, are
inseparable. And so long as man has not found another way to settle
individually and collectively the conflict between old and new, thus
appropriating his historicity, a surpassing of aesthetics that would not be
limited to exaggerating the split that traverses it appears unlikely.
There is a note in Kafka's notebooks in which this inability of man to recover
his space in the tension between past and future history is expressed with
particular precision in the image of
. . . travelers in a train that has met with an accident in a tunnel, and this at a
place where the light of the beginning can no longer be seen, and the light of
the end is so very small a glimmer that the gaze must continually search for it
and is always losing it again, and, furthermore, it is not even certain whether it
is the beginning or the end of the tunnel. 8
At the time of Greek tragedy, when the traditional mythic system had begun to
decline under the impulse of the new moral world that was being born, art had
already assumed the task of settling the conflict between old and new, and
had responded to this task with the figure of the guilty innocent, of the tragic
hero who expresses in all his greatness and misery the precarious
significance of human action in the interval between what is no longer and
what is not yet.
Kafka is the author of our time who has most coherently assumed this task.
Faced with man's inability to appropriate his own historical presuppositions,
he tried to turn this impossibility into the very soil on which man might recover
himself. In order to realize this project, Kafka reversed Benjamin's image of
the angel of history: the angel has already arrived in Paradise--in fact he was
there from the start, and the storm and his subsequent flight along the linear
time of progress are nothing but an illusion he creates in the attempt to falsify
his knowledge and to transform his perennial condition into an aim still to be
attained.
It is in this sense that the apparently paradoxical thought expressed in the
”Reflections on Sin, Pain, Hope, and the True Way” should be understood:
”There is a goal, but no path; what we call the path is only wavering,” and
”Only our concept of Time makes it possible for us to call the day of the Last
Judgment by that name; in reality it is a summary court in perpetual session
[ Standrechty].” 9 For man it is always already the day of the Last Judgment:
the Last Judgment is his normal historical condition, and only his fear of facing
it creates the illusion that it is still to come. Kafka thus replaces the idea of a
history infinitely unfolding along an empty, linear time (this is the history that
compels the Angelus Novus to his unstoppable run) with the paradoxical
69
image of a state of history in which the fundamental event of the human
condition is perpetually taking place; the continuum of linear time is
interrupted, but does not create an opening beyond itself. 10 The goal is
inaccessible not because it is too far in the future but because it is present
here in front of us; but its presence is constitutive of man's historicity, of his
perennial lingering along a nonexistent path, and of his inability to appropriate
his own historical situation.
This is why Kafka can say that the revolutionary movements that declare null
and void everything that has happened before are right, because in reality
nothing has happened yet. The condition of man who has gotten lost in history
ends up looking like that of the southern Chinese in the story told in The Great
Wall of China: ”There is also involved a certain feebleness of faith and
imaginative power on the part of the people, that prevents them from raising
the empire out of its stagnation in Peking and clasping it in all its palpable
living reality to their own breasts, which yet desire nothing better than but
once to feel that touch and then to die.” And yet ”this very weakness should
seem to be one of the greatest unifying influences among our people; indeed,
if one may dare to use the expression, the very ground on which we live.” 11
In the face of this paradoxical situation, asking about art's task is the
equivalent of asking what could be its task on the day of the Last Judgment,
that is, in a condition (which for Kafka is man's very historical status) in which
the angel of history has stopped and, in the interval between past and future,
man has to face his own responsibility. Kafka answered this question by
asking whether art could become transmission of the act of transmission:
whether, that is, it could take as its content the task of transmission itself,
independently of the thing to be transmitted. As Benjamin understood, Kafka's
genius before the unprecedented historical situation of which he had become
aware was that he ”sacrificed truth for the sake of transmissibility.” 12 Since
the goal is already present and thus no path exists that could lead there, only
the perennially late stubbornness of a messenger whose message is nothing
other than the task of transmission can give back to man, who has lost his
ability to appropriate his historical space, the concrete space of his action and
knowledge.
In this way, at the limit of its aesthetic itinerary, art abolishes the gap between
the thing to be transmitted and the act of transmission and again comes
closer to the mythic-traditional system, in which a perfect identity existed
between the two terms. In this ”attack on the last earthly frontier,” 13 art
transcends the aesthetic dimension and thus, with the construction of a totally
abstract moral system, eludes the fate that destined it to kitsch. Yet, although
it can reach the threshold of myth, it cannot cross it. If man could appropriate
his historical condition, and if, seeing through the illusion of the storm that
perennially pushes him along the infinite rail of linear time, he could exit his
paradoxical situation, he would at the same time gain access to the total
knowledge capable of giving life to a new cosmogony and to turn history into
myth. But art alone cannot do this, since it is precisely in order to reconcile the
historical conflict between past and future that it has emancipated itself from
myth and linked itself to history.
By transforming the principle of man's delay before truth into a poetic process
and renouncing the guarantees of truth for love of transmissibility, art
70
succeeds once again in transforming man's inability to exit his historical
status, perennially suspended in the inter-world between old and new, past
and future, into the very space in which he can take the original measure of
his dwelling in the present and recover each time the meaning of his action.
According to the principle by which it is only in the burning house that the
fundamental architectural problem becomes visible for the first time, art, at the
furthest point of its destiny, makes visible its original project.
71
