Okwui EnWEZOR:后殖民星丛下的当代艺术
=============================
发布时间：2011-04-05 00:17
 Contemporary art today is refracted, not just from the specific site of culture and history but in a more critical sense, from the standpoint of a complex geopolitical configuration that defines all systems of production and relations of exchange as a consequence of globalization after impe- rialism. It is this geopolitical configuration and its postimperial trans- formations that situate what I call here ”the postcolonial constellation.” The changes wrought by transitions to new forms of governmentality and institutions, new domains of living and belonging as people and citizens, cultures, and communities, define the postcolonial matrix that shapes the ethics of subjectivity and creativity today. Whereas classical European thought formulated the realm of subjectivity and creativity as two domains of activity each informed by its own internal cohesion, without an outside, such thought today is consistently questioned by the constant tessellation of the outside and inside, each folding into and opening out to complex communicative tremors and upheavals. Perhaps, then, bringing contempo- rary art into the context of the geopolitical framework that define global relations-between the so-called local and the global, center and margin, nation-state and the individual, transnational and diasporic communities, audiences and institutions-offers a perspicacious view of the postcolo- nial constellation. The constellation, however, is not made up solely of the dichotomies named above, but can be understood as a set of arrangements of deeply entangled relations and forces that are founded by discourses of power. Such discourses of power are geopolitical in nature and by exten- sion can be civilizational in their reliance on binary oppositions between cultures, which in a sense are inimical to any transcultural understanding of the present context of cultural production. Geopolitical power arrange- ments are defined along much the same ligne Maginot in the artistic con- text. With a terrible tear at its core, evidence of such a ligne Maginot in the artistic context lends contact between different artistic cultures an air of civilizational distinctions predicated on the tension between the developed and underdeveloped, reactionary and progressive, regressive and advanced, avant-garde and outmoded. Such a discourse, however, is a heritage of clas- sical modernity, which, through these distinctions, furnishes the dialectical and ideological agenda for competition and hegemony often found in the spaces of art and culture. What follows is a response to my initial assertions that the current artistic context is constellated around the norms of the postcolonial based on the discontinuous, aleatory forms, creolization, hybridization, etc. with a specific cosmopolitan accent. From the outset, the assertions are not relativistic, even if they attempt to displace certain stubborn values that have structured the discourse of Western modernism and determined its power over other modernisms. Edouard Glissant, whose classic work Carib- bean Discourse made us aware of the tremor at the roots2 of the postcolonial order, interprets current understanding of global modernity as essentially the phenomenon of creolization of cultures, wherefore he permits us to see in global processes of movement, resettlement, recaliberation, changes and shifts, modalities of cultural transformations that by necessity can neither
Okwui Enwezor 59 by wholly universal nor essentially particular. Contemporary culture as such, for Glissant, is cross-cultural, reconstituting itself as a ”flood of con- vergences publishing itself in the guise of the commonplace.” In this state- ment, there is an intimation that instructs our notion of the modern world, one that carries the echo and the guise of the commonplace, the social universe that produces the content of all modern subjectivities-that is all subjectivities that emerge directly from the convergences and proximities wrought by imperialism and that today direct us to the postcolonial. The current history of modern art sits at the intersection between imperial and postcolonial discourses. Therefore, any critical interest displayed towards exhibition systems that takes as its field of study modern or contemporary art necessarily refers us to the foundational base of modern art history and its roots in imperial discourse, on the one hand, and, on the othe,r the pres- sures that postcolonial discourse exerts on its narratives today. From its inception, the history of modern art has been inextricably bound to the history of its exhibitions both in its commodity function through collectors in the economic sphere and in its iconoclasm evidenced by the assaults on formalism by the historical avant-garde. Both the com- modity function of modern art and the avant-garde legacy have played strong legitimizing roles through exhibitions. In fact, it could be said that no significant change in the direction of modern art occurred outside the framework of the public controversies generated by its exhibitions.” To phrase it differently, fundamental to the historical understanding of modern art is the important role played through the forum and medium of exhibitions in explicating the trajectory taken by artists, their supporters, critics, and the public in identifying the great shifts that have marked all encounters with modern art and advanced its claim for enlightened singu- larity among other cultural avatars. For contemporary art, this history is no less true, and the recent phenomenon of the curator in shaping this history has been remarkable. There have occurred, however, a number of remark- able mutations in the growing discourse of exhibitions and in the public representations of art as something wholly autonomous and separate from the sphere of other cultural activities that must be studied very carefully. Exhibitions have evolved from the presentation of singular perspectives of certain types of artistic development to the frightening Gesamkunstwerk evident in mega-exhibitions globally that seem to have overtaken the entire field of contemporary artistic production. If we are to judge correctly the proper role of the curator in this state of affairs, then the exhibition as form, genre, or medium, and as a communicative, dialogical forum of conversations between heterogeneous actors, publics, and objects needs further probing.
