ZT:外国的中国星象学家写的金猪年说法
=============================
发布时间：2007-02-18 13:30
 From Times OnlineFebruary 16, 2007
Pig of a year? On the contrary. . .Why this most aupicious of years brings the promise of great progress and prosperityNeil Somerville The Year of the Pig is significant, not only in completing the cycle of animal years, but also in marking what can be a time of considerable opportunity and growth. Pig years have potential and this year will be no exception. 
The year 2007 is especially auspicious. This is the Year of the Fire Pig, with the element of fire giving the already auspicious Pig year a greater dynamism. Because of the fire element’s colour, which is associated with gold, it is also called the Year of the Golden Pig. It comes around only once every 60 years and is considered one of the luckiest in the entire Chinese zodiac. 
Although there is some debate over the origins of the “golden pig”, with some believing it more a marketing opportunity (with lots of golden piggy banks and other items being sold), there is general agreement that Fire Pig years are considered prosperous, lucky — and excellent for having a baby. 
One prominent feature of the Pig year is that it favours family values and the home. Over the year, much emphasis will be placed on the quality of the home life and on leading a more balanced lifestyle. 
Economic prospects are also encouraging for the year. The leisure, entertainment and construction industries could fare particularly well. The financial sector could also have a good year, with several stock markets recording new highs. It was in the last Pig year, 1995, that the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed above the 5,000 mark for the first time and the Nasdaq Composite Index first closed above 1,000. 
However, while many will benefit from the buoyant conditions, the Pig year also calls for personal restraint. When times feel good, it can be tempting to spend freely and increase credit, and without care, problems could result. This may be an expansive time, but it is also one for realism. 
In addition to the growth seen in many economies, certain industries will be enjoying major advances during the year and new products will often make life easier and more efficient. IBM launched the personal computer system in a Pig year (1983) and the transistor and self-starter motor were also invented in Pig years: 2007 will hold more major inventions. 
Previous Pig years have been characterised by severe weather patterns and this year will be no exception. In the last Pig year there were unprecedented heat waves in many countries; in America, Midwestern states were particularly affected, with temperatures exceeding 40°C (104°F) for five consecutive days. 
Political leaders will also be active in dealing with some long-running disputes and here real progress can be made. In some areas occupying troops could be withdrawn and treaties negotiated which will bring peace to troubled areas. As it is a year that marks the end of another Chinese year cycle, it can be a time for completing unfinished business and much can be achieved as a result. 
Another feature of the year is that quite a few countries will see political change. In particular, those who have been in power for some time will now make way for others. Several important figures will emerge on to the world stage and usher in change for their respective countries. Britain is one country that could experience such a change. 
The Chinese astrology expert Neil Somerville has been writing the bestselling Your Chinese Horoscope series since 1987. He is the author of several books, on the subject, including Chinese Success Signs . This page is extracted from Your Chinese Horoscope 2007 (Harper Element), by Neil Somerville, RRP ￡8.99, available for ￡8.09, including PP, from The Times BooksFirst (0870 1608080, www.booksfirst.co.uk)
 Have your say  ?????????? Enjoy this festive season, both the Chinese and non-Chinese in UK! =.)
Alv Sim, Singapore, Singapore
Gung Hei Fat Choi! May I wish everyone Good Health and Prosperity!
Raymond, Lancashire, England
I would like to wish all of you. ”Gung Hay Fat Choy”
Ken, Wollongong, Australia
Happy Chinese New year to every Chinese and every friend of Chinese!Wish China makes bigger progress !
Tiffany, Guangdong, China
Happy Chinese New Year 'The Golden Pig' to both the chinese and none Chinese around the world.
Laurie, Ponty, UK
