ZT:普鲁斯特认为轻音乐与古典音乐同样重要:
=============================
发布时间：2007-02-23 19:58
 ”诅咒坏音乐,但千万别轻看它!这在音乐史上的地位很低,但它在人类文明的情感史中是极其重要的.”
        The 'light music' that turned Proust on
    Last Updated: 12:01am GMT 22/02/2007    
            Ivan Hewett on turning Proust on and salon music
        Poking around in a secondhand shop recently, I came across a dusty pile of short piano pieces with quaintly exotic covers.
        One, called Flowers of Japan, showed a row of Japanese ladies pictured in black and white, with ”Japanese” characters round the border and a view of Mount Fuji in the distance.
        advertisement                                                          Underneath was a London Cake-walk with Big Ben in the background. A bit further down was a Valse de Paris. Piles of music like this lurk in attics and junk shops all round the country.
        They're the last sad remnants of a vast musical culture which goes by the name of ”salon music” or ”light music”.
        There are two interesting things here. One is that salon music has always been despised; the other is that its rise happened as classical music became a middle-class social ritual, with its concert halls and opera houses.
        Classical music and salon music had a strange love-hate relationship. They have a lot in common in terms of musical vocabulary and technical polish. But in another way they're complete opposites - one is ”deep”, and the other is ”trivial” or ”shallow”.
        It's as if the culture needed a lightning rod to attract and ”earth” all the cosy feelings and fantasies people wanted in music, but which weren't high-minded enough for classical music.
        Salon music was a money-spinner, so classical composers couldn't afford to ignore it. Chopin began his career in the salon, and his small-scale waltzes, mazurkas and preludes often summon up a world of aristocratic ladies, listening in rapt silence amid the Chinese screens and potted palms.
        Later, the pieces moved out of the salon and into the bourgeois living-room.
        Elgar and Sibelius were among the ”serious” composers who wrote wonderful salon pieces, and there was a whole host of composers who wrote nothing else (and some of the most successful composers of this ”ladies' music” were themselves women, like Cécile Cheminade).
        But when ”modern music” started to appear, serious music and salon music (which had now moved into the mass media and become ”light music”) lost their common ground. By the mid-20th century, a cordon sanitaire had grown up between them. Boulez's modernist Le Marteau sans matre, and Eric Coates's The Scent of Lilac date from same year, 1954, but seem to come from different planets.
        I was brought up during the high-tide of modernist music, so of course I automatically despised salon music.
        Just lately, though, I've caught myself listening to things like Elgar's Chanson de Matin and Sibelius's Valse Triste and actually enjoying them. And it seems I'm not alone.
        The flashier sort of salon music, such as operatic transcriptions by composers like Liszt and Thalberg, is creeping back into concert programmes. And, thanks to the CD, the really obscure end of salon music is also making a comeback.
        You've probably never heard of the salon composer Lucien Durosoir; neither had I until his sweetly melancholic violin pieces from the 1920s were recently released on CD.
        Does this mean salon music really isn't as bad as we always thought it was? Yes and no.
        The best pieces are truly marvellous. I'd rather hear a good salon piece than an unfocused, pretentious ”serious” piece any day. But the worst ones, like the ones in that secondhand pile of piano music, are truly awful.
        And yet there was something about the look of those old piano pieces that made me handle them with a kind of reverence. The affection that had been lavished on them still clung to the pages.
        Marcel Proust captured this aspect of salon music in his essay ”In Praise of Bad Music”: ”By all means curse bad music, but don't despise it! It may rank very low in the history of art, but it is immensely important in the sentimental history of civilisation.
        Ordinary people have always had the same messengers and couriers for their agonies and joys, namely: bad musicians! How many hackneyed old songs, that any cultivated ear would instantly refuse to listen to, have not received the treasures of thousands of souls, and guarded the secrets of thousands of lives?”
