《千高原》名段：战争机器和国家装置
=============================
发布时间：2011-02-10 00:18
 12. 1227: Treatise on Nomadology—
The War Machine
AXIOM I. The war machine is exterior to the State apparatus.
PROPOSITION I. This exteriority is first attested to in mythology, epic,
drama, and games.
Georges Dumezil, in his definitive analyses of Indo-European mythology,
has shown that political sovereignty, or domination, has two heads: the
magician-king and the jurist-priest. Rex and flamen, raj and Brahman,
Romulus and Numa, Varuna and Mitra, the despot and the legislator, the
binder and the organizer. Undoubtedly, these two poles stand in opposition
term by term, as the obscure and the clear, the violent and the calm, the
quick and the weighty, the fearsome and the regulated, the ”bond” and the
”pact,” etc.' But their opposition is only relative; they function as a pair, in
alternation, as though they expressed a division of the One or constituted
in themselves a sovereign unity. ”At once antithetical and complementary,
necessary to one another and consequently without hostility, lacking a
351
0 352 □
1227: TREATISE ON NOMADOLOGY—THE WAR MACHINE
mythology of conflict: a specification on any one level automatically calls
forth a homologous specification on another. The two together exhaust the
field of the function.” They are the principal elements of a State apparatus
that proceeds by a One-Two, distributes binary distinctions, and forms a
milieu of interiority. It is a double articulation that makes the State apparatus
into a stratum.
It will be noted that war is not contained within this apparatus. Either
the State has at its disposal a violence that is not channeled through war—
either it uses police officers and jailers in place of warriors, has no arms and
no need of them, operates by immediate, magical capture, ”seizes” and
”binds,” preventing all combat—or, the State acquires an army, but in a
way that presupposes a juridical integration of war and the organization of
a military function.2 As for the war machine in itself, it seems to be irreducible
to the State apparatus, to be outside its sovereignty and prior to its law:
it comes from elsewhere. Indra, the warrior god, is in opposition to Varuna
no less than to Mitra? He can no more be reduced to one or the other than
he can constitute a third of their kind. Rather, he is like a pure and immeasurable
multiplicity, the pack, an irruption of the ephemeral and the power
of metamorphosis. He unties the bond just as he betrays the pact. He brings
a furor to bear against sovereignty, a celerity against gravity, secrecy against
the public, a power (puissance) against sovereignty, a machine against the
apparatus. He bears witness to another kind of justice, one of incomprehensible
cruelty at times, but at others of unequaled pity as well (because he
unties bonds.. .).4 He bears witness, above all, to other relations with
women, with animals, because he sees all things in relations of becoming,
rather than implementing binary distributions between ”states”: a veritable
becoming-animal of the warrior, a becoming-woman, which lies outside
dualities of terms as well as correspondences between relations. In
every respect, the war machine is of another species, another nature,
another origin than the State apparatus.
Let us take a limited example and compare the war machine and the
State apparatus in the context of the theory of games. Let us take chess and
Go, from the standpoint of the game pieces, the relations between the
pieces and the space involved. Chess is a game of State, or of the court: the
emperor of China played it. Chess pieces are coded; they have an internal
nature and intrinsic properties from which their movements, situations,
and confrontations derive. They have qualities; a knight remains a knight,
a pawn a pawn, a bishop a bishop. Each is like a subject of the statement
endowed with a relative power, and these relative powers combine in a subject
of enunciation, that is, the chess player or the game's form of
interiority. Go pieces, in contrast, are pellets, disks, simple arithmetic
units, and have only an anonymous, collective, or third-person function:
0 1227:
TREATISE ON NOMADOLOGY—THE WAR MACHINE □ 353
”It” makes a move. ”It” could be a man, a woman, a louse, an elephant. Go
pieces are elements of a nonsubjectified machine assemblage with no
intrinsic properties, only situational ones. Thus the relations are very different
in the two cases. Within their milieu of interiority, chess pieces
entertain biunivocal relations with one another, and with the adversary's
pieces: their functioning is structural. On the other hand, a Go piece has
only a milieu of exteriority, or extrinsic relations with nebulas or constellations,
according to which it fulfills functions of insertion or situation, such
as bordering, encircling, shattering. All by itself, a Go piece can destroy an
entire constellation synchronically; a chess piece cannot (or can do so
diachronically only). Chess is indeed a war, but an institutionalized, regulated,
coded war, with a front, a rear, battles. But what is proper to Go is war
without battle lines, with neither confrontation nor retreat, without battles
even: pure strategy, whereas chess is a semiology. Finally, the space is not at
all the same: in chess, it is a question of arranging a closed space for oneself,
thus of going from one point to another, of occupying the maximum number
of squares with the minimum number of pieces. In Go, it is a question
of arraying oneself in an open space, of holding space, of maintaining the
possibility of springing up at any point: the movement is not from one
point to another, but becomes perpetual, without aim or destination, without
departure or arrival. The ”smooth” space of Go, as against the ”striated”
space of chess. The nomos of Go against the State of chess, nomos
against polis. The difference is that chess codes and decodes space, whereas
Go proceeds altogether differently, territorializing or deterritorializing it
(make the outside a territory in space; consolidate that territory by the construction
of a second, adjacent territory; deterritorialize the enemy by
shattering his territory from within; deterritorialize oneself by renouncing,
by going elsewhere . ..). Another justice, another movement, another
space-time.
”They come like fate, without reason, consideration, or pretext. . .” ”In
some way that is incomprehensible they have pushed right into the capital.
At any rate, here they are; it seems that every morning there are more of
them.”5 Luc de Heusch analyzes a Bantu myth that leads us to the same
schema: Nkongolo, an indigenous emperor and administrator of public
works, a man of the public and a man of the police, gives his half-sisters to
the hunter Mbidi, who assists him and then leaves. Mbidi's son, a man of
secrecy, joins up with his father, only to return from the outside with that
inconceivable thing, an army. He kills Nkongolo and proceeds to build a
new State.6 ”Between” the magical-despotic State and the juridical State
containing a military institution, we see the flash of the war machine, arriving
from without.
From the standpoint of the State, the originality of the man of war, his
0 354 □
1227: TREATISE ON NOMADOLOGY—THE WAR MACHINE
eccentricity, necessarily appears in a negative form: stupidity, deformity,
madness, illegitimacy, usurpation, sin. Dumezil analyzes the three ”sins”
of the warrior in the Indo-European tradition: against the king, against the
priest, against the laws originating in the State (for example, a sexual transgression
that compromises the distribution of men and women, or even a
betrayal of the laws of war as instituted by the State).7 The warrior is in the
position of betraying everything, including the function of the military, or
of understanding nothing. It happens that historians, both bourgeois and
Soviet, will follow this negative tradition and explain how Genghis Khan
understood nothing: he ”didn't understand” the phenomenon of the city.
An easy thing to say. The problem is that the exteriority of the war machine
in relation to the State apparatus is everywhere apparent but remains difficult
to conceptualize. It is not enough to affirm that the war machine is
external to the apparatus. It is necessary to reach the point of conceiving
the war machine as itself a pure form of exteriority, whereas the State apparatus
constitutes the form of interiority we habitually take as a model, or
according to which we are in the habit of thinking. What complicates
everything is that this extrinsic power of the war machine tends, under certain
circumstances, to become confused with one of the two heads of the
State apparatus. Sometimes it is confused with the magic violence of the
State, at other times with the State's military institution. For instance, the
war machine invents speed and secrecy; but there is all the same a certain
speed and a certain secrecy that pertain to the State, relatively, secondarily.
So there is a great danger of identifying the structural relation between the
two poles of political sovereignty, and the dynamic interrelation of these
two poles, with the power of war. Dumezil cites the lineage of the Roman
kings: there is a Romulus-Numa relation that recurs throughout a series,
with variants and an alternation between these two types of equally legitimate
rulers; but there is also a relation with an ”evil king,” Tullus Hostilius,
Tarquinius Superbus, an upsurge of the warrior as a disquieting and illegitimate
character.8 Shakespeare's kings could also be invoked: even violence,
murders, and perversion do not prevent the State lineage from producing
”good” kings; but a disturbing character like Richard III slips in, announcing
from the outset his intention to reinvent a war machine and impose its
line (deformed, treacherous and traitorous, he claims a ”secret close
intent”9 totally different from the conquest of State power, and another
—an other—relation with women). In short, whenever the irruption of war
power is confused with the line of State domination, everything gets muddled;
the war machine can then be understood only through the categories
of the negative, since nothing is left that remains outside the State. But,
returned to its milieu of exteriority, the war machine is seen to be of
another species, of another nature, of another origin. One would have to
0 1227:
TREATISE ON NOMADOLOGY—THE WAR MACHINE □ 355
say that it is located between the two heads of the State, between the two
articulations, and that it is necessary in order to pass from one to the other.
But ”between” the two, in that instant, even ephemeral, if only a flash, it
proclaims its own irreducibility. The State has no war machine of its own; it
can only appropriate one in the form of a military institution, one that will
continually cause it problems. This explains the mistrust States have
toward their military institutions, in that the military institution inherits
an extrinsic war machine. Karl von Clausewitz has a general sense of this
situation when he treats the flow of absolute war as an Idea that States partially
appropriate according to their political needs, and in relation to
which they are more or less good ”conductors.”
Trapped between the two poles of political sovereignty, the man of war
seems outmoded, condemned, without a future, reduced to his own fury,
which he turns against himself. The descendants of Hercules, Achilles,
then Ajax, have enough strength left to proclaim their independence from
Agamemnon, a man of the old State. But they are powerless when it comes
to Ulysses, a man of the nascent modern State, the first man of the modern
State. And it is Ulysses who inherits Achilles' arms, only to convert them to
other uses, submitting them to the laws of the State—not Ajax, who is condemned
by the goddess he defied and against whom he sinned.10 No one
has portrayed the situation of the man of war, at once eccentric and condemned,
better than Kleist. In Penthesilea, Achilles is already separated
from his power: the war machine has passed over to the Amazons, a Stateless
woman-people whose justice, religion, and loves are organized
uniquely in a war mode. Descendants of the Scythians, the Amazons spring
forth like lightning, ”between” the two States, the Greek and the Trojan.
They sweep away everything in their path. Achilles is brought before his
double, Penthesilea. And in his ambiguous struggle, Achilles is unable to
prevent himself from marrying the war machine, or from loving Penthesilea,
and thus from betraying Agamemnon and Ulysses at the same time.
Nevertheless, he already belongs enough to the Greek State that Penthesilea,
for her part, cannot enter the passional relation of war with him
without herself betraying the collective law of her people, the law of the
pack that prohibits ”choosing” the enemy and entering into one-to-one
relationships or binary distinctions.
