什么是解构？----德里达在各文本内的不同解答
=============================
发布时间：2008-06-09 10:39
 1-解构是发明式，扼或不是；它不满于仅仅使用一些方法论程序；它要撕开一个通道来，它大踏步走，它留下记号（marche et marque）;它的写作不仅仅是执事式的（performative）；它生产出规则，也就是为另外的执事行为生产出新的规范（conventions），而不要太过于在理论上自信于执事与实义之间的简单操作。它是一种demache是一种回退一步、举步又止的肯定（德里达《心灵》，35页）。它与事件的到来相连，与我们的创造发明相连。这是要重新创造他者；将自己看作他者，将自己当作他者地来谈论自己。
2-不要将非自然的东西自然化，不要将被历史、机构或社会限制和局限的东西，当作是自然的或天然的。解构总是先已居我们的内部，总已在起作用。南西认为，基督教就是自我解构的，它今天 的面貌，就是其自我解构的结果。路德式的解构？海德格尔尔式解构？德里达说，他想做另外一种，用另外一种来影响这些妥构传统。（见http://hk.youtube.com/watch?v=b39WzjxgYssfeature=related）
3-解构是写构，一写，我就感到是在闯入新区；起初，这总需要一些姿势，它们会很有侵略性，会动摇，会使焦虑，会伤害同行；以这些姿态去写时，我自己会有恐惧。在写时，我是不会有这些恐惧与焦虑的，相反，写作时，我感到有一种强于我的某种必然性在牵引我，在要求我必须写出我写出的东西，我所以从不因为恐惧而舍弃我已出的东西。我写作时，没有任何东西可以吓住我。半睡时，会有那些一些时刻，我会被我在做的事儿吓住、吓坏；我会对自己说：你一定疯了，会去那样写，在我下意识里产生了惊惧，就象孩子做了可怕的事儿，就象弗洛伊德描述的儿儿童想象、在梦里见到自己被剥光了一样。那时，我感到自己做了犯罪般的事儿，丢脸和无法推托的事儿。但我一醒来，这一切就结束。这表明，在我醒着写着时，我是比我半睡着时更无意识的！半睡时，我有警惕，有某种意识告诉我在做可怕的事儿；但醒时，这种警惕是睡着了。我就做我必须做的事去了(http://hk.youtube.com/watch?v=w9YaNW7Q0c8feature=related)。
4-解构：在场总是被切分了的。为什么要去解构本来是那么可爱的东西？解构来自己我自己身内的自我矛盾。我自己对向善欲望，我自己的形而上学式在场，不但不能完成， 达到其极限和边界，而且也不应当被 完成。我的这些对在场的欲望一旦完成，就成了死亡本身，善本身就是死亡了。这种必然性以一种狂暴的方式教导我，强迫我承认，我的欲望，形而上学欲望，是无法被完成的，它不可能到场，在场总是被切分的，分裂，总是被不同的差异所标记。而这一界限和限制正应该成为我的欲望有的条件（http://hk.youtube.com/watch?v=J1IScOonGMQfeature=related）。
5-与日本朋友 Izutsu 的通信里说到
When I chose the word, or when it imposed itself on me - I think it was in *Of Grammatology* - I little thought it would be credited with such a central role in the discourse that interested me at the time. Among other things I wished to translate and adapt to my own ends the Heidggerian word Destruktion or Abbau. Each signified in this context an operation bearing on the structure or traditional architecture of the fundamental concepts of ontology or of Western metaphysics. But in French ”destruction” too obviously implied an annihilation or a negative reduction much closer perhaps to Nietzschean ”demolition” than to the Heideggerian interpretation or to the type of reading that I proposed. So I ruled that out. I remember having looked to see if the word ”deconstruction” (which came to me it seemed quite spontaneously) was good French. I found it in the Littré. The grammatical, linguistic, or rhetorical senses [portees] were found bound up with a ”mechanical” sense [portee ”machinique”]. This association appeared very fortunate, and fortunately adapted to what I wanted at least to suggest. Perhaps I could cite some of the entries from the Littré. 
”Deconstruction: action of deconstructing. Grammatical term. Disarranging the construction of words in a sentence. 'Of deconstruction, common way of saying construction', Lemare, De la maniére d'apprendre les langues, ch.17, in *Cours de langue Latine*. Deconstruire: 1. To disassemble the parts of a whole. To deconstruct a machine to transport it elsewhere. 2. Grammatical term... To deconstruct verse, rendering it, by the suppression of meter, similar to prose. Absolutely. ('In the system of prenotional sentences, one also starts with translation and one of its advantages is never needing to deconstruct,' Lemare, ibid.) 3. Se deconstruire [to deconstruct itself] ... to lose its construction. 'Modern scholarship has shown us that in a region of the timeless East, a language reaching its own state of perfection is deconstructed [s'est deconstruite] and altered from within itself according to the single law of change, natural to the human mind,' Villemain, *Preface du Dictionaire de l'Academie*.” 
。。。
A few more words on the subject of ”the context”. At that time structuralism was dominant. ”Deconstruction” seemed to be going in the same direction since the word signified a certain attention to structures (which themselves were neither simply ideas, nor forms, nor syntheses, nor systems). To deconstruct was also a structuralist gesture or in any case a gesture that assumed a certain need for the structuralist problematic. But it was also an antistructuralist gesture, and its fortune rests in part on this ambiguity. Structures were to be undone, decomposed, desedimented (all types of structures, linguistic, ”logocentric”, ”phonocentric” - structuralism being especially at that time dominated by linguistic models and by a so-called structural linguistics that was also called Saussurian - socio-institutional, political, cultural, and above all and from the start philosophical.) 
This is why, especially in the , the motif of deconstruction has been associated with ”poststructuralism” (a word unknown in  until its ”return” from the States). But the undoing, decomposing, and desedimenting of structures, in a certain sense more historical than the structuralist movement it called into question, was not a negative operation. Rather than destroying, it was also necessary to understand how an ”ensemble” was constituted and to reconstruct it to this end. However, the negative appearance was and remains much more difficult to efface than is suggested by the grammaar of the word (de-), even though it can designate a genealogical restoration [remonter] rather than a demolition. That is why the word, at least on its own, has never appeared satisfactory to me (but what word is), and must always be girded by an entire discourse. It is difficult to effect it afterward because, in the work of deconstruction, I have had to, as I have to here, multiply the cautionary indicators and put aside all the traditional philosophical concepts, while reaffirming the necessity of returning to them, at least under erasure. Hence, this has been called, precipitately, a type of negative theology (this was neither true nor false but I shall not enter into the debate here). 
All the same, and in spite of appearances, deconstruction is neither an analysis nor a critique and its translation would have to take that into consideration. It is not an analysis in particular because the dismantling of a structure is not a regression toward a simple element, toward an indissoluble origin. These values, like that of analysis, are themselves philosophemes subject to deconstruction. No more is it a critique, in a general sense or in Kantian sense. The instance of krinein or of krisis (decision, choice, judgment, discernment) is itself, as is all the apparatus of transcendental critique, one of the essential ”themes” or ”objects” of deconstruction. 
I would say the same about method. Deconstruction is not a method and cannot be tranformed into one. Especially if the technical and procedural significations of the word are stressed. It is true that in certain circles (university or cultural, especially in the ) the technical and methodological ”metaphor” that seems necessarily attached to the very word deconstruction has been able to seduce or lead astray. Hence the debate that has developed in these circles: Can deconstruction become a methodology for reading and for interpretation? Can it thus be allowed to be reappropriated and domesticated by academic institutions? 
It is not enough to say that deconstruction could not be reduced to some methodological instrumentality or to a set of rules and transposable procedures. Nor will it do to claim that each deconstructive ”event” remains singular or, in any case, as close as possible to something like an idiom or a signature. It must also be made clear that deconstruction is not even an act or an operation. Not only because there would be something ”patient” or ”passive” about it (as Blanchot says, more passive than passivity, than the passivity that is opposed to activity). Not only because it does not return to an individual or collective subject who would take the initiative and apply it to an object, a text, a theme, etc. 
Deconstruction takes place, it is an event that does not await the deliberation, consciousness, or organization of a subject, or even of modernity. It deconstructs itself. It can be deconstructed. [a se deconstruit.] The ”it” [a] is not here an impersonal thing that is opposed to some egological subjectivity. It is in deconstruction (the Littré says, ”to deconstruct itself [se deconstruire]... to lose its construction”). And the ”se” of ”se deconstruire,” which is not the reflexivity of an ego or of a consciousness, bears the whole enigma. I recognize, my dear driend, that in trying to make a word clearer so as to assist its translation, I am only thereby increasing the difficulties: ”the impossible task of the translator” (Benjamin). This too is meant by ”deconstructs”. 
If deconstruction takes place everywhere it [a] takes place, where there is something (and is not therefore limited to meaning or to the text in the current and bookish sense of the word), we still have to think through what is happening in our world, in modernity, at the time when deconstruction is becoming a motif, with its word, its privileged themes, its mobile strategy, etc. I have no simple and formalizable response to this question. All my essays are attempts to have it out with this formidable question. They are modest symptoms of it, quite as much as tentative interpretations. I would not even dare to say, following a Heideggerian schema, that we are in an ”epoch” of being-in-deconstruction, of a being-in-deconstruction that would manifest or dissimulate itself at one and the same time in other ”epochs”. This thought of ”epochs” and especially that of a gathering of the destiny of being and of the unity of its destination or its dispersions (Schicken, Geschick) will never be very convincing. 
To be very schematic I would say that the difficulty of defining an therefore also of translating the word ”deconstruction” stems from the fact that all the predicates, all the defining concepts, all the lexical significations, and even the syntactic articulations, which seem at one moment to lend themselves to this definition or to that translation, are also deconstructed or deconstructible, directly or otherwise, etc. And that goes for the word deconstruction, as for every word. *Of Grammatology* questioned the unity ”word” and all the privileges with which is was credited, especially in its nominal form. It is therefore only a discourse or rather a writing that can make up for the incapacity of the word to be equal to a ”thought”. All sentences of the type ”deconstruction is X” or ”deconstruction is not X” a priori miss the point, which is to say that they are at least false. As you know, one of the principal things at stake in what is called in my texts ”deconstruction” is precisely the delimiting of ontology and above all of the third person present indicative: S is P. 
The word ”deconstruction”, like all other words, acquires its value only from its inscription in a chain of possible substitutions, in what is too blithely called a ”context”. For me, for what I have tried and still try to write, the word has interest only within a certain context, where it replaces and lets itself be determined by such other words as ”ecriture”, ”trace”, ”differance”, ”supplement”, ”hymen”, ”pharmakon”, ”marge”, ”entame”, ”parergon”, etc. By definition, the list can never be closed, and I have cited only names, which is inadequate and done only for reasons of economy. In fact I should have cited the sentences and the interlinking of sentences which in their turn determine these names in some of my texts. 
What deconstruction is not? everything of course! What is deconstruction? nothing of course! I do not think, for all these reasons, that it is a good word [un bon mot]. It is certainly not elegant [beau]. It has definitely been of service in a highly determined situation. In order to know what has been imposed upon it in a chain of possible substitutions, despite its essential imperfection, this ”highly determined situation” will need to be analyzed and deconstructed. This is difficult and I am not going to do it here. One final word to conclude this letter, which is alread too long. I do not believe that translation is a secondary and derived event in relation to an original languag or text. And as ”deconstruction” is a word, as I have just said, that is essentially replaceable in a chain of substitution, then that can also be done from one language to another. The chance, first of all the chance of (the) ”deconstruction”, would be that another word (the same word and an other) can be found in Japanese to say the same thing (the same and an other), to speak of deconstruction, and to lead elsewhere to its being written and transcribed, in a word which will also be more beautiful. When I speak of this writing of the other which will be more beautiful, I clearly understand translation as involving the same risk and chance as the poem. How to translate ”poem”? a ”poem”?... 
6-罗蒂：什么是德里达的解构？这个术语首要地指一个文本的“事故式特征”或被看作是背叛原文、颠覆原文中有意传达的那一“本质”消息的。
The word deconstruction plays as small a role in Derrida's writing as Abbau and Destruktion played in Heidegger's. 'Deconstructionism' was, initially, no more Derrida's chosen label for his own thought than 'existentialism' was Heidegger's label for the doctrines of Being and Time. But, because Derrida was made famous (in English-speaking countries) not by his fellow-philosophers but by literary critics (who were looking for new ways of reading texts rather than for a new understanding of intellectual history), this label has (in those countries) become firmly attached to a school of which Derrida is, rather to his own surprise and bemusement, the leading figure.2 As used by members of this school, the term 'deconstruction', refers in the first instance to the way in which the 'accidental' features of a text can be seen as betraying, subverting, its purportedly 'essential' message.3 
7-In her book The Critical Difference (1981), Barbara Johnson clarifies the term: 
”Deconstruction is not synonymous with ”destruction”, however. It is in fact much closer to the original meaning of the word 'analysis' itself, which etymologically means ”to undo” -- a virtual synonym for ”to de-construct.” ... If anything is destroyed in a deconstructive reading, it is not the text, but the claim to unequivocal domination of one mode of signifying over another. A deconstructive reading is a reading which analyses the specificity of a text's critical difference from itself.” 
8-最后的访谈里谈什么是解构：
Ensuite, depuis le début de mon travail, et ce serait la “déconstruction” même, je suis resté extrêmement critique à l’égard de l’eurocentrisme, dans la modernité de ses formulations, chez Valéry, Husserl ou Heidegger par exemple. La déconstruction en général est une entreprise que beaucoup ont considérée, à juste titre, comme un geste de méfiance à l’égard de tout eurocentrisme. Quand il m’arrive, ces temps-ci, de dire “nous les Européens”, c’est conjoncturel et très différent: tout ce qui peut être déconstruit de la tradition européenne n’empêche pas que, justement à cause de ce qui s’est passé en Europe, à cause des Lumières, à cause du rétrécissement de ce petit continent et de l’énorme culpabilité qui transit désormais sa culture (totalitarisme, nazisme, génocides, Shoah, colonisation et décolonisation, etc.), aujourd’hui, dans la situation géopolitique qui est la ntre, l’Europe, une autre Europe mais avec la même mémoire, pourrait (c’est en tout cas mon vu) se rassembler à la fois contre la politique d’hégémonie américaine (rapport Wolfowitz, Cheney, Rumsfeld, etc.) et contre un théocratisme arabo-islamique sans Lumières et sans avenir politique (mais ne négligeons pas les contradictions et les hétérogénéités de ces deux ensembles, et allions-nous avec ceux qui résistent de l’intérieur à ces deux blocs).
