从剩余价值到剩余快感
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-28 11:17
全球资本主义，还是那个全球资本主义它选？后者是乌托邦，前者呢？也是。
每次一点点，但也是快感。一夜之间实现，那么第二天早晨之后呢，我们怎么为继？
齐泽克认为，对此的最合理的解释应该是：马克思的科学社会主义应该是自由主义式资本主义的有效障碍，前者保证后者达到它的潜能的最大值。正是前者使后者看上去也像乌托邦了。自由主义式资本主义舍弃或牺牲自己的快感，一次次快感的放弃，来像富裕兰克林教导的那样累积换取更大的快感，这才是更崇高的乌托邦？
One of the ”proofs” of my practice of fetishist disavowal is the alleged ”perverse paradox” of me rejecting utopias and then nonetheless claiming that today ”it is more important than ever to hold this utopian place of the global alternative open”(142) - as if I did not repeatedly elaborate different meanings of utopia: utopia as simple imaginary impossibility (the utopia of a perfected harmonious social order without antagonisms, the consumerist utopia of today's capitalism), and utopia in the more radical sense of enacting what, within the framework of the existing social relations, appears as ”impossible” - this second utopia is ”a-topic” only with regard to these relations. Utopia as simple imaginary impossibility (the utopia of a perfected harmonious social order without antagonisms, the consumerist utopia of today's capitalism), is not utopia in the more radical sense of enacting what, within the framework of the existing social relations, appears as ”impossible” - this second utopia is ”a-topic” only with regard to these relations.
The core of a Lacanian notion of utopia is: a vision of desire functioning without objet a and its twists and loops. It is utopian not only to think that one can reach the unencumbered full ”incestuous” jouissance; it is no less utopian to think that one can renounce/sacrifice jouissance without this renunciation generating its own surplus-jouissance. In this sense, Marx's ”scientific Socialism” itself has a clear utopian core. Marx perceived how capitalism unleashed the breath-taking dynamics of self-enhancing productivity - see his fascinated descriptions of how, in capitalism, ”all things solid melt into thin air,” of how capitalism is the greatest revolutionizer in the entire history of humanity; on the other hand, he also clearly perceived how this capitalist dynamics is propelled by its own inner obstacle or antagonism - the ultimate limit of capitalism (of the capitalist self-propelling productivity) is the Capital itself, i.e. the capitalist incessant development and revolutionizing of its own material conditions, the mad dance of its unconditional spiral of productivity, is ultimately nothing but a desperate flight forward to escape its own debilitating inherent contradiction. Marx's fundamental mistake was to conclude, from these insights, that a new, higher social order (Communism) is possible, an order that would not only maintain, but even raise to a higher degree and effectively fully release the potential of the self-increasing spiral of productivity which, in capitalism, on account of its inherent obstacle/contradiction, is again and again thwarted by socially destructive economic crises. In short, what Marx overlooked is that, to put it in the standard Derridean terms, this inherent obstacle/antagonism as the ”condition of impossibility” of the full deployment of the productive forces is simultaneously its ”condition of possibility”: if we abolish the obstacle, the inherent contradiction of capitalism, we do not get the fully unleashed drive to productivity finally delivered of its impediment, but we lose precisely this productivity that seemed to be generated and simultaneously thwarted by capitalism - if we take away the obstacle, the very potential thwarted by this obstacle dissipates... (Therein would reside a possible Lacanian critique of Marx, focusing on the ambiguous overlapping between surplus-value and surplus-jouissance). - Furthermore, utopian is not only the conservative dream of regaining some idealized Past before the Fall; no less utopian is the liberal-pragmatic idea that one can solve problems gradually, one by one(＜为魔鬼一族制定的市场机制＞). 
