他们不愿让西方老师失望，打掉了牙往肚子里咽，像个成熟的主体好运样忍爱自由选择所带来的苦难
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-16 23:26
 Let us take the situation in the Eastern European countries
around 1990, when Really Existing Socialism was falling
apart: all of a sudden, people were thrown into a situation of
the “freedom of political choice” — however, were they
REALLY at any point asked the fundamental question of what
kind of new order they actually wanted? Is it not that they
found themselves in the exact situation of the subject—victim
of a Beauvois experiment? They were first told that they were
entering the promised land of political freedom; then, soon
afterwards, they were informed that this freedom involved
wild privatization, the dismantling of the system of social
security, etc. etc. — they still have the freedom to choose, so if
they want, they can step out; but, no, our heroic Eastern
Europeans didn’t want to disappoint their Western mentors,
they stoically persisted in the choice they never made, convincing
themselves that they should behave as mature subjects
who are aware that freedom has its price ... This is why the
notion of the psychological subject endowed with natural
propensities, who has to realize its true Self and its potentials,
and who is, consequently, ultimately responsible for his failure
or success, is the key ingredient of liberal freedom.
And here one should risk reintroducing the Leninist opposition
of “formal” and “actual” freedom: in an act of actual
freedom, one dares precisely to BREAK the seductive power of
symbolic efficiency. Therein resides the moment of truth of
Lenin’s acerbic retort to his Menshevik critics: the truly free
choice is a choice in which I do not merely choose between
two or more options WITHIN a pre-given set of coordinates,
but I choose to change this set of coordinates itself. The catch
of the “transition” from Really Existing Socialism to capitalism
was that people never had the chance to choose the ad
quem of this transition — all of a sudden, they were (almost
literally) “thrown” into a new situation in which they were
presented with a new set of given choices (pure liberalism,
nationalist conservatism ... ). What this means is that the
“actual freedom” as the act of consciously changing this set
occurs only when, in the situation of a forced choice, one
ACTS AS IF THE CHOICE IS NOT FORCED and “chooses the
impossible.”
This is what Lenin’s obsessive tirades against “formal”
freedom are about, therein resides their “rational kernel”
which is worth saving today: when he emphasizes that there is
no “pure” democracy, that we should always ask who does a
freedom under consideration serve, which is its role in the
class struggle, his point is precisely to maintain the possibility
121 “Father, Why Did You Forsake Me?”
of the TRUE radical choice. This is what the distinction
between “formal” and “actual” freedom ultimately amounts
to: “formal” freedom is the freedom of choice WITHIN the
coordinates of the existing power relations, while “actual”
freedom designates the site of an intervention which undermines
these very coordinates. In short, Lenin’s point is not to
limit freedom of choice, but to maintain the fundamental
Choice — when Lenin asks about the role of a freedom
within the class struggle, what he is asking is precisely: “Does
this freedom contribute to or constrain the fundamental
revolutionary Choice?”(《论信仰》，120-121)。 
