作为享乐主义者的最后的人：不受限制的消费是最大的危险
=============================
发布时间：2010-02-03 23:19
 尼采说的最后的人就在我们身边：他们养身，喝不带糖的饮料，不带咖啡因的咖啡，天天给人提供人生格言等等；他们是享乐主义者，但是很保守。我过去一直不知道自己为什么恨这些人，现在我才明白：这些人为了替自己躲避生活的风险，他们毫无必要地去加倍、加宽地消费，他们多吃的药、补品、化妆品和为了使自己的生活舒适而消费的各种小玩意儿，恰恰是对他们的世界的破坏。为了他一已的享乐主义念头，他可以这样无法无天地消费开去。
消费总是要去消费那一事物本身。那事物本身之正宗、纯正和纯天然。从矿泉水到毒品之间有无数个选择。
齐泽克也说到了这件事儿（《Homo Sacer作为大学话语的对象》）：
Is this not the attitude of the hedonistic Last Man? Everything is permitted, you can enjoy everything, BUT deprived of its substance which makes it dangerous. (This is also Last Man's revolution — ”revolution without revolution.”) Is this not one of the two versions of Lacan's anti-Dostoyevski motto ”If God doesn't exist, everything is prohibited”? (1) God is dead, we live in a permissive universe, you should strive for pleasures and happiness — but, in order to have a life full of happiness and pleasures, you should avoid dangerous excesses, so everything is prohibited if it is not deprived of its substance; (2) If God is dead, superego enjoins you to enjoy, but every determinate enjoyment is already a betrayal of the unconditional one, so it should be prohibited. The nutritive version of this is to enjoy directly the Thing Itself: why bother with coffee? Inject caffeine directly into your blood! Why bother with sensual perceptions and excitations by external reality? Take drugs which directly affect your brain! - And if there is God, then everything is permitted — to those who claim to act directly on behalf of God, as the instruments of His will; clearly, a direct link to God justifies our violation of any ”merely human” constraints and considerations (as in Stalinism, where the reference to the big Other of historical Necessity justifies absolute ruthlessness).
Today's hedonism combines pleasure with constraint — it is no longer the old notion of the ”right measure” between pleasure and constraint, but a kind of pseudo-Hegelian immediate coincidence of the opposites: action and reaction should coincide, the very thing which causes damage should already be the medicine. The ultimate example of it is arguably a chocolate laxative, available in the US, with the paradoxical injunction ”Do you have constipation? Eat more of this chocolate!”, i.e., of the very thing which causes constipation. Do we not find here a weird version of Wagner's famous ”Only the spear which caused the wound can heal it” from Parsifal? And is not a negative proof of the hegemony of this stance the fact that true unconstrained consumption (in all its main forms: drugs, free sex, smoking…) is emerging as the main danger? The fight against these dangers is one of the main investments of today's ”biopolitics.” Solutions are here desperately sought which would reproduce the paradox of the chocolate laxative. The main contender is ”safe sex” — a term which makes one appreciative of the truth of the old saying ”Is having sex with a condom not like taking a shower with a raincoat on?”. The ultimate goal would be here, along the lines of decaf coffee, to invent ”opium without opium”: no wonder marijuana is so popular among liberals who want to legalize it — it already IS a kind of ”opium without opium.”
The structure of the ”chocolate laxative,” of a product containing the agent of its own containment, can be discerned throughout today's ideological landscape. There are two topics which determine today's liberal tolerant attitude towards Others: the respect of Otherness, openness towards it, AND the obsessive fear of harassment — in short, the Other is OK insofar as its presence is not intrusive, insofar as the Other is not really Other… A similar structure is clearly present in how we relate to capitalist profiteering: it is OK IF it is counteracted with charitable activities — first you amass billions, then you return (part of) them to the needy… And the same goes for war, for the emergent logic of humanitarian or pacifist militarism: war is OK insofar as it really serves to bring about peace, democracy, or to create conditions for distributing humanitarian help. And does the same not hold more and more even for democracy: it is OK if it is ”rethought” to include torture and a permanent emergency state, if it is cleansed of its populist ”excesses,” and if the people are ”mature” enough to live by it…
