使那些无名者有力量：but with the empowerment of the capacity of no matter who.
=============================
发布时间：2008-11-23 13:17
 评读朗西埃《普遍性的胡闹》：把战争带回家，它是由你的购物袋带回家的。你反战，是反可口可乐帝国，是反你的消费王国。The Iraqi victims turn out to be only victims of the empire of Coca-Cola, and the protesters are only fighting against that empire, or as a risk of perceiving and making us perceive that this empire ultimately turns out to be the empire of their own consumption. 
马克思进入资本主义系统核心。可口可乐掌握了马克思主义软件。Gramsci once said that the soviet revolution was revolution against Marx’s Capital, because Marx’s book had become the book of the Bourgeois scientists. The same thing occurred with the kind of Marxism with which the so-called “children of Marx and Coca-Cola” grew up: the Marxism of the denunciation of the mythologies of commodity, the fallacies of consumer’s society and of the empire of the spectacle. Forty years ago, it was supposed to “unmask” the machineries of domination, so as to provide the fighters with new weapons. It has turned to exactly the contrary: sort of nihilist wisdom that was the reign of the commodity and the spectacle, the equivalence of anything with anything, and of anything with its image and with the lie of its image. 恐怖主义和消费都服从商品规律。So, the “phantom scenes of global power” show us the circularity of a worldwide complicity: the protest is organized against the terrorism of the “war on terror”, made by the empire of consumption that throws its shells on Mid-eastern towns. The shells are response to the terror of the attack of the towers. The attack itself had been displayed as the spectacle of the collapse of the empire. The protesters in turn have consumed the images of the collapse of the towers, the image of the bombing in  and what they offer in the streets is a spectacle too, performed by consumers of spectacular horrors and diet coke. Ultimately terrorism and consumption, protest and spectacle are shown as part of the same process, a process governed by the law of the commodity which is the law of equivalence. 欧洲民主大潮使民主再也不可能：And at the end of 89 the collapse of the soviet system was hailed in the Western World as the triumph of that idea of democracy, as the equivalence of public freedom, free market and the free choice by the individuals of their own way of life. But what happened after was exactly the contrary: the consensus on democracy as “human rights + free market+ free individual choice” vanished with the collapse of its enemy. In the years that followed, more and more furious intellectual campaigns trumpeted the disaster that was made to democracies by an enemy called democracy, more precisely by the disastrous connection between “human rights “ and “ free individual choice”.
统治阶级说全球化势头不可阻挡，这也就是说，你必须听任他们用专家、法官和治疗师来统治你了。As we know, the ruling oligarchies that govern our world today have appropriated for themselves the Marxist idea of the historical necessity. The only difference, you know, is that the historical necessity now leads to the triumph of the free market and not the triumph of the revolution. They tell us that there is a global necessity that imposes its laws, so that it is not in the power of anybody to oppose it. This is the principal of consensus. What “consensus” means is not only a specific form of government using expertise, arbitrage and agreement in order to avoid conflicts. 
虚无主义智慧和左派式忧郁统治着我们。再去揭示现实，是神经病了。必须用那些被排除在系统之外的政治主体和我们在系统内的那些主体的那些未被算计在内的力量，来打击这个系统，艺术和教师作为诗人，是要通过戏剧排练式的活动，来引导新政治主体的加入，德里达在《马克思幽灵》里是说要象哈姆莱特那样来上演戏中戏。
