例将状态：生活与法重合，自然与例外状态重合了，这就是我们的全球化生活
=============================
发布时间：2009-12-10 23:52
 法与生活不可分，我们永远生活于一种例外状态里了：the mass societies and great totalitarian states of our time. For life under a law that is in force without signifying resembles life in the state of exception, in which the most innocent gesture or the smallest forgetfulness can have most extreme consequences. And it is exactly this kind of life that Kafka describes, in which law is all the more pervasive for its total lack of content, and in which a distracted knock on the door can mark the start of uncontrollable trials.
法好象没有了，是因为处处都有它了。任何一个一个小的偶然都对我们有决定性了。这就是《三枪》中小沈阳的处境。电影里是想不把它拍成例外状态。但阿甘本说，我们都是这样的ｈｏｍｏ　ｓａｃｅｒ，都生活于这样的作为常态的例外状态中了。
弥撒亚主义是一种关于例外状态的理论了：This is the meaning of the enigmatic passage in Kafka’s notebooks where he writes, “The Messiah will only come when he is no longer necessary, he will only come after his arrival, he will come not on the last day, but on the very last day.” The final sense of the legend is thus not, as Derrida writes, that of an “event that succeeds in not happening” (or that happens in not happening: “an event that happens not to happen,” un événement qui arrive à ne pas arriver [“Préjugés,” p. 359]), but rather precisely the opposite: the story tells how something has really happened in seeming not to happen, and the messianic aporias of the man from the country express exactly the difficulties that our age must confront in attempting to master the sovereign ban.
 One of the paradoxes of the state of exception lies in the fact that in the state of exception, it is impossible to distinguish transgression of the law from execution of the law, such that what violates a rule and what conforms to it
coincide without any remainder (a person who goes for a walk during the curfew is not transgressing the law any more than the soldier who kills him is executing it). This is precisely the situation that, in the Jewish tradition (and, actually, in every genuine messianic tradition), comes to pass when the Messiah arrives. The first consequence of this arrival is that the Law (according to the Kabbalists, this is the law of the Torah of Beriah, that is, the law in force from the creation of man until the messianic days) is fulfilled and consummated. But this fulfillment does not signify that the old law is simply replaced by a new law that is homologous to the old but has different prescriptions and dif-ferent prohibitions (the Torah of Aziluth, the originary law that the Messiah, according to the Kabbalists, would restore, contains neither prescriptions nor prohibitions and is only a jumble of unordered letters). What is implied instead is that the fulfillment of the Torah now coincides with its transgression. This much is clearly affirmed by the most radical messianic movements, like that of Sabbatai Zevi (whose motto was “the fulfillment of the Torah is its transgression”).
From the juridico-political perspective, messianisrn is therefore a theory of the state of exception — except for the fact that in messianism there is no authority in force to proclaim the state of exception; instead, there is the Messiah to subvert its power（Ｈｏｍｏ　ｓａｃｅｒ，３８）.
