共同的审美经验是打破劳动分工和学科分工的起点
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-24 12:35
 1-It is this arrangement [dispositif] that aesthetic experience deregulates. It is thus that such
experience is much more than a way of appreciating works of art. It concerns the
definition of a type of experience which neutralises the circular relationship between
knowledge [connaissance] as know-how [savoir] and knowledge as the distribution of
roles. Aesthetic experience eludes the sensible distribution of roles and competences
which structures the hierarchical order. The sociologist would like this to be nothing
more than the illusion of the philosopher, who believes in the disinterested universality of
judgements concerning the beautiful, since it ignores the conditions which determine the
tastes and the manner of being of the worker. But here the builders believe Plato rather
than the sociologist: what they need, and what aesthetic experience signifies, is a change
in the regime of belief, the change of the rapport between what the arms know how to do
and what the eyes are capable of seeing.
2-布迪厄式的社会学批斗是不好的，因为，它只是维护了工人阶级自己的审美独立自主性，沁有强调共同的审美经验，没有将审美和感性分享当作一个政治问题来看。This is what is meant by a discipline. A discipline is always something other than an
exploitation of this territory, and therefore a demonstration of an idea of knowledge
[savoir]. And an idea of knowledge [savoir] should be understood as a regulation of the
rapport between the two knowledges [savoir] and two ignorances. It is a way of defining
an idea of the thinkable, an idea of what the objects of knowledge themselves can think
and know. It is therefore always a certain regulation of dissensus, of its dehiscence
[écart] in relation to the ethical order, according to which a certain type of condition
implies a certain type of thought.
It is this context of the thinkable which is at work when Bourdieu constructs the dispositif
of phrases and photographies, attesting that the distinguished and popular classes each
JACQUES RANCIERE
7
adopt, whatever Kant says, the tastes which correspond to their place. We know that the
questionnaires used for this purpose are made notably to avoid the phenomena of
‘allodoxy’. For example, the following opinion is proposed to the popular public: ‘I love
classical music, for example the waltzes of Strauss’. The formulation of the opinion is
conceived as a snare for the workers who will lie, saying that they love classical music,
but are betrayed, being ignorant of the fact that Strauss does not deserve to be considered
a composer of classical music.
It is clear that the sociological method here presupposes the result that it was supposed to
establish. In other words, science — before being a method to study the phenomena of
orthodoxy and allodoxy — is an orthodoxy, a war machine against allodoxy. But what it
calls allodoxy is in fact aesthetic dissensus, the dehiscence between the arms and the gaze
of the carpenter, the sensible rupture of the relation between a body and what it knows —
in the double sense of knowing. The settling of scores between the sociologist and Kant is
first of all the settling of scores with our woodworker. Sociology, before being a
discipline taught in the university is first of all, in another sense, a war machine invented
in the age of the aesthetic which is also the age of democratic revolutions, as a response
to the troubles of this age.
Before being the ‘science of society’, sociology was first historically the project of a
reorganisation of society. It wanted to remake a body for this society supposedly divided
by philosophical abstraction, protestant individualism and revolutionary formalism. It
wanted to reconstitute the social fabric such that individuals and groups at a given place
would have the ethos, the ways of feeling and thinking, which corresponded at once to
their place and to a collective harmony. Sociology today has certainly distanced itself
from this organicist vision of society. But it continues, for the benefit of science, to want
what science wants for the good of society, to understand [savoir] the rule of
correspondence between social conditions and the attitudes and judgements of those who
belong to it. The scientific war against the allodoxy of judgements continues the political
war against ‘anomie’ of behaviour, the war against the aesthetic and democratic unrest of
the division of the body politic within itself。
3-Disciplinary thought says: we have our territory, our objects and the methods which
correspond to them. This is what sociology or history, political science or literary theory,
says. This is also what philosophy, in the regular sense, says, posing itself as a discipline.
But at the moment in which it wants to found its status as a discipline of disciplines, it
produces this reversal: the foundation of foundation is a story. And philosophy says to
those knowledges [savoir] who are certain of their methods: methods are recounted
stories. This does not mean that they are null and void. It means that they are weapons in
a war; they are not tools which facilitate the examination of a territory but weapons
which serve to establish its always uncertain boundary.
There is no assured boundary separating the territory of sociology from that of
philosophy or that of the historians from literature. No well-defined boundary separates
the discourse of the woodworker who is the object of science from the discourse of
science itself. After all is said and done, to trace these boundaries is to trace the boundary
between those who have thought through this question and those who have not. This
boundary is never traced other than in the form of a story. Only the language of stories
can trace the boundary, forcing the aporia of the absence of final reason from the reasons
of the disciplines.
I once proposed the concept of a ‘poetics of knowledges [savoirs]’. A poetics of
knowledges is not a simple way of saying that there is always literature in attempts at
rigorous argumentation. Such a demonstration still belongs to the idle logic of
demystification. The poetics of knowledges does not claim that the disciplines are false
knowledges. It claims that they are disciplines, ways of intervening in the interminable
war between ways of declaring what a body can do, in the interminable war between the
reasons of equality and those of inequality. It does not claim that they are invalid because
they tell stories. It claims that they must borrow their presentations of objects, their
THINKING BETWEEN DISCIPLIINES
12
procedures for interaction and their forms of argument from language and common
thought. A poetics of knowledge is first a discourse which reinscribes the force of
descriptions and arguments in the equality of common language and the common
capacity to invent objects, stories and arguments. In this sense it can be called a method
of equality.（《在学科间思考----知识的美学》）.
