关于钱使一个人有眼光有魄力
=============================
发布时间：2007-11-29 11:33
 一种象歌舞剧台词那样的腔调，来重申一些庸俗的真理，读了倒也有一些激情的味道：
Memo to Messrs Hicks and Gillett: That, gentlemen, is what you pay the money for. Sincerely, Rafa.
With little more than ten minutes remaining and qualification for the part of the Champions League that matters hanging by a strand, Fernando Torres, the most expensive Barclays Premier League signing of the season, scored the goal that sends Liverpool and their manager, Rafael Bentez, to Marseilles next month very much alive and kicking. As he did so, he offered a timely reminder.
What separates the great from the good these days are the deep pockets of football club owners and the ability to entrust the contents to a man with a plan. Liverpool have such a man in Bentez; and if Tom Hicks and George Gillett Jr are prepared to reconcile and get behind him, anything is possible.
This was a match billed as Bentez’s last stand. The price of failure, it was said, would be high. Either Bentez was finished or he would be a dead man walking, like José Mourinho at Chelsea once Roman Abramovich’s gaze wandered. As it was, he departed in a stronger position than ever. A show of strength from the supporters demonstrated that, while the new owners may forget that fifth European Cup win in a hurry, those who number their dedication to Liverpool in years, not weeks, would not. More to the point, this was a victory that underlined the worth of investment along with another hoary football adage: the one about getting what you pay for.
Bentez got Torres for roughly ￡21.5 million and that is a lot. If the club win their first Premier League title, lift this trophy for a sixth time, or even make the lucrative trip to Moscow in May, who is counting, though? The scoreline might make it look as if it did not take a special player to defeat FC Porto, but do not believe a word of it.At the point when Torres got Liverpool’s noses in front again, a crisis was unfolding. The scores were level at Anfield and, across Europe, in Istanbul, where Marseilles were holding Besiktas. One more goal from the French side and Liverpool would have been out. Instead, it was Torres who showed his mettle with a coolly taken goal to set up an impressive victory and Marseilles who blinked by losing to a team who conceded eight at Anfield on their previous Champions League outing.
Liverpool must still win when they travel south for the final group game on December 11, but the most slender margin will now be enough. It is the sort of set-piece European affair in which Bentez specialises; ask Mourinho, his former sparring partner.
That the decisive goal was scored by Torres is appropriate. Bentez believes that his bosses do not understand the transfer market, so an asset-saving goal from an expensive acquisition was not amiss.
这部分写得好，故意用一些文绉绉的句式，来显得老练：Bentez is a winner because he thinks one step ahead. If he wants to discuss January transfer-window business now, not in one month’s time, there will be a reason, just as there was a reason that he broke the bank for Torres. Bentez talked up the impact of his substitutions — particularly Kewell — but the world-class striker was the real difference here, make no mistake of that. 
He had already scored Liverpool’s first; an altogether simpler affair, as it always will be if opponents leave him unmarked in the penalty area at corners. Gerrard supplied the ammunition, Torres’s head did the rest.
