分析哲学与大陆哲学是完全两种不兼容的东西；在哲学系，这两种哲学之间的差异，比哲学与数学之间的差异还
=============================
发布时间：2008-09-04 14:20
 When one attempts to describe what is going on in the worlds' philosophy departments these days, the first distinction to draw is between moral, social and political philosophy on the one hand, and philosophy of mind and language on the other. Those who work in the former area do not have much to say to those working in the latter, and conversely. Philosophy professors who write on ethics and politics usually read more books by professors of political science and of jurisprudence than books by fellow philosophers who discuss the relation between the mind and the body, or that between language and reality. That both are members of the same department is more an accident of institutional history than a result of shared interests.    
　　The difference between these two broad areas of concern is highlighted by the fact that the split between ”analytic” philosophy and ”non-analytic” philosophy (the kind sometimes called ”Continental”) has little relevance to books about morals and politics. Those labels are largely irrelevant to such figures as John Rawls, Juergen Habermas, Noberto Bobbio, Chantal Mouffe, Isaiah Berlin, and Cornelius Castoriadis. All these thinkers are concerned with the same questions as are non-philosophers like Michael Walzer, Richard Posner, Michael Ignatieff, and Ulrich Beck-questions about how we might alter our social and political institutions so as better to combine freedom with order and justice. 
　　Once we bracket off moral and political philosophy, however, the analytic vs. Continental split becomes salient. I think of this split as between the philosophers who are inclined to agree with Frank Ramsey that Bertrand Russell's theory of descriptions is a paradigm of philosophy and those who would argue that nothing Russell did compares in importance with Hegel's The Phenomenology of Spirit or with Heidegger's Letter on Humanism. It is a division between philosophers who think that you can do first-rate philosophy without knowing much intellectual history and those who think that philosophy is at its best when it takes the form of a dramatic narrative, a narrative ending with the words ”Thus far has the world-spirit advanced.” 
　　Someone who thinks of herself as an analytic philosopher of mind and language will almost certainly be familiar with, and will probably have views about, Russell's theory. But she may never have read, and may have little ambition to read, either Hegel or Heidegger. Yet if you teach philosophy in most non-anglophone countries, you must have read and pondered both The Phenomenology of Spirit and Letter on Humanism, or at least pretend to have done so. But you can skip the theory of descriptions. Brazilian, Turkish and Polish philosophers manage to get by with only a vague idea of why their Anglophone colleagues believe Russell to have been an important figure. 
