华勒斯坦：新的反系统运动：左派近期目标
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-14 12:53
 A strategy for the period of transition ought therefore to include four
components—all of them easier said than done. The first is a process of
constant, open debate about the transition and the outcome we hope for.
This has never been easy, and the his tor ic anti systemic movements were
never very good at it. But the atmosphere is more favourable to day than
it has ever been, and the task remains urgent and indispensable—underlining
the role of intel lec tuals in this conjuncture. The structure of the
WSF has lent itself to en couraging this debate; we shall see if it is able to
maintain this openness.
The second component should be self-evident: an antisystemic movement
cannot neglect short-term defensive action, including elec toral
action. The world’s populations live in the present, and their immediate
needs have to be addressed. Any movement that neglects them is bound
to lose the widespread passive support that is essential for its long-term
success. But the motive and justifica tion for defensive action should not
be that of remedying a failing system but rather of preventing its negative
effects from getting worse in the short run. This is quite different
psychologically and po litically.
The third component has to be the establishment of interim, middlerange
goals that seem to move in the right direction. I would suggest that
one of the most useful—substantively, politically, psychologically—is
the attempt to move towards selective, but ever-widening, decommodification.
We are subject today to a barrage of neoliberal attempts to
wallerstein: Against the System 39
commodify what was previously seldom or never appropriated for private
sale—the human body, water, hospitals. We must not only oppose
this but move in the other direction. Industries, especially failing industries,
should be decommodified. This does not mean they should be
‘nationalized’—for the most part, simply another version of commodification.
It means we should create struc tures, operating in the market,
whose ob jec tive is performance and survival rather than profit. This can
be done, as we know, from the history of universi ties or hospitals—not
all, but the best. Why is such a logic im possible for steel factories threatened
with delocalization?
Finally, we need to develop the substantive meaning of our long-term
em phases, which I take to be a world that is relatively demo cra tic and
relatively egalitarian. I say ‘relatively’ because that is re al istic. There
will always be gaps—but there is no reason why they should be wide,
encrusted or hereditary. Is this what used to be called socialism, or even
communism? Per haps, but per haps not. That brings us back to the issue
of de bate. We need to stop as sum ing what the better (not the perfect)
society will be like. We need to discuss it, outline it, experi ment with
alterna tive struc tures to realize it; and we need to do this at the same
time as we carry out the first three parts of our programme for a chaotic
world in systemic transition. And if this programme is insufficient, and
it probably is, then this very insufficiency ought to be part of the debate
which is Point One of the programme. 
