南西：摄影强调了“我”与其他的他者之间的关系
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-28 11:42
 每一次卡嚓都更远地隔离了我们的身体，这个眼和手可以盯挤的身体，使我们更深地感到自己的奇异，使我们多了一层思想的好奇：
Photography is a monster with two subjects, with a double body
(human) and a single, cavernous head whose one eye blinks on and
off.
At this point, at this moment, in this place of the photograph in
which time blinks and is distended as an immobile surface, the most
exact and the most rigorous nous autres is produced. Each one affirms
its alterity while both together make the request for an identity distinct
from every other, in whose distinction they are absorbed into one another, one by the other (as in a designation of this sort: James
Joyce by Gise`le Freund, a view of one of them [Joyce] in the eyes of
the other, and one of them looking [Freund] into the eyes of the
other). It is the identity of the photograph itself, openly non-identical
to itself and thus strangely identical to the superimposition of the two
others in it, the viewfinder and the viewed surprising one another—
over-seeing [sur-veillant] one another and suddenly ‘‘coming upon’’
or happening [sur-venant] to one another. Both of them together, as
a ‘‘photograph,’’ pronouncing a kind of silent nous autres.
In this sense, each of the I’s (model and photographer—or subject
and subject . . . ) deposits in the photo a performative self-certainty,
by attesting only in the other to one’s own distinction as wholly other.
Each photograph forms a nous autres in which, for a moment, the
eternal instant that trembles in the photo unites photographer and
photographed who are now one—a single identity assumed, and presumed,
for which the photograph is only the supposition and the support.
Consequently, although every photograph articulates this
‘‘nous autres,’’ it also ends up pronouncing and performing a tacit I
that it itself immediately and improbably is.
Every photograph is an irrefutable and luminous I am, whose
proper being is neither the photographed subject nor the photographing
subject, but the silvery or digital evidence of a grasping: this
thing, that thing, this man here, that woman there was grasped,
there, at that time, by a click, and this hic et nunc eternalizes here and
now, on this paper on which it was developed and printed, its sovereign
hesitation immobilized and sublimated in the decision that took it,
and grasped it, by surprise. This grasping presents itself and says to
us, ‘‘I am.’’ But at the same time this I amsays ‘‘nous autres’’: we who
were grasped in the grasping, we who were surprised and caught
together by this hic et nunc, which makes us others together, others to
one another, one through another and one in another, others who we
never are outside of this surprise, we who are other (finally and
above all) than you who regard us, we others who are now embedded
in the strangeness of our illuminated capture.
Like the other ego sum, this one is made explicit as an ego cogito.
Photography thinks, which is to say that it relates to itself as the
photo-being that it is. It is experienced and constructed as an illumination,
a dividing up and sharing out of shadow, frame, grain, and
depth of field, and in doing so it determines a knot of signification whose intimate entwining is played out in the grasping or gripping
of hesitation. Because this knot cannot be undone—only somewhat
loosened, through a few interpretive sketches—thought remains here
fundamentally a thought of its own strangeness.
In a photograph there is always something hallucinatory, something
that has lost its way or is out of place. Whereas painting—or
cinema, though in a completely different way—works to present, to
bring us into proximity with a modality of presence, photography,
which at first seems bound to operate in the same direction, is given
over to an irrepressible removal of its own presence.4 It is lost; as
soon as it is printed [tiree]—as though drawn [tiree] out of nothing—
it is withdrawn [retiree] from our grasp, hidden, and secret.
Even the least photograph openly holds out a secret, and it does so
by metamorphosing everything into an alterity all the more altered in
that it is close to us, in that it refers us to our familiar immediacy.
Consequently, it always murmurs a nous autres: we (others) who are
exposed, who are illuminated by the sun, the moon, and the projectors,
we (others) who are the strange beings of this world of day and
night, we (others) who surprise ourselves in viewing ourselves, in
turning ourselves into visions, in photosynthesizing ourselves, we humans
and shadows of humans, we are our most proper and therefore
our strangest, most foreign others.
The secret of the photograph, the very clear mystery of its being
lost and straying, is its flight into the strange in the very midst of the
familiar. The photo captures the familiar, and immediately, instantaneously,
it strays into strangeness. By capturing its own straying, it
leads what it captures astray. The photograph estranges, it estranges
us. Between the subject of the click and the subject grasped, there is
a coexistence without coincidence, or there is a coincidence without
contact, or a contact without union (which is the law of contact).
The encounter is ineffective in its effectivity (which is the law of
encounter).
Such is the straying and secret I am of the photo. Thus it does not
say, ‘‘I is an other’’; rather, it proffers the wholly other ‘‘I am’’ whose
text consists in ‘‘we others.’’ It remains to be asked whether there is
ever any I am that is not laden in the depths of it-self with innumerable
we-others: but that is perhaps exactly what the photograph
charges itself with uncovering, with suggesting. Each ‘‘subject’’ in the
photo refers tacitly, obstinately, to all the others, to this prodigious
universe of photos in(to) which we all take ourselves and one another,
at some time or another, this colossal and labyrinthine photo-theque in whose depths there stalks—like a Minotaur—the monster,
the monstration, and the prodigious image of our strangeness. The
encounter is always monstrous, or monstrating, ostensive and threatening,
invasive and evasive in the same moment, straying in its capture,
released in being grasped. This is not a dialectic, or else it is the
point—the seed or grain—of madness that vibrates at the heart of
every dialectic, the labyrinth that disturbs its progress and throws it
off course.
This grain, or this labyrinth, is called a body. A photograph is a
rubbing or rubbing away of a body.We others, as others, are bodies.
When we meet one another, we are bodies. We are in each case the
brother or the sister of the Minotaur’s human body, and it is this
body’s blood that flows through the beast’s head. The bodiless, for
its part, is the same, the self-same, hidden behind its body, the dimensionless
point of spirit, the empty reference of a formal ‘‘I think.’’ But
what makes the photograph possible (and what once made people
believe that it could capture spirits in its gelatin) is that in the photo
it is a question of the body: it is the body that grasps, and it is the
body that is grasped and released. It is the body, its thin surface,
that is detached and removed by the film. This is the physics and the
chemistry of the instant, the force of gravity of the click, this curvature
of space and this impalpable lightness of a vision that precipitates
and coagulates into a thickness of skin, a density of touch. The
contact and the tact of the photographic click detaches a new body
each time, an instantaneous body, unstable and fixed in its instability,
as a loving or a suffering body, desiring or fearing, which is surprised
and overtaken by pleasure or pain. We others, we difficult bodies,
delicate bodies and exposed skins obscured by their own clarity, bodies
gently pressed and released by another body, by its eye, its finger,
its uncertain thought of being and appearing, which suddenly comes
to take its place in us (others), as in the cavernous recesses in which
it will carry on its rumination（《图像的基础》，104-107）.
