史罗德戴克：二十世纪的两个黑格尔：德里达与卢曼
=============================
发布时间：2010-02-06 00:09
 Luhmann and Derrida
Of all the constellations in which Derrida's work
could be placed, the one involving Luhmann's
ceuvre is the most outlandish - but also the most
revealing. Each of the two thinkers has been honoured
with the highest and most problematic
praise that can be bestowed upon an author in the
field of theory: that he was the Begel of the twentieth
century. Titles of this kind may be attractive
for superficial reflection and useful for public relations,
but they can hardly accompany any serious
interest. None the less, they possess a certain characterizing
power in the case of both these eminent
figures, in so far as 'Begel' is not simply a
proper name, but also refers to a programme or a
position in an educational process . To mention
Begel is to speak of culmination, the non plus
ultra and exhaustion; at the same time, the name
1
Luhmann and Derrida
stands for synthetic and encyclopedic energies
that can only appear in the calm after the stormor,
as Kojeve and Queneau might have put it, on
the Sunday after history. These names mark a confluence
of imperial and archival ambitions .
It would obviously be completely pointless to
examine Derrida and Luhmann in terms of their
respectively unique Hegelianism. Nor were the
two men Sunday thinkers, but rather the opposite:
tireless workers who made Sunday a working day
- literally and for fundamental reasons - and furthermore
held the conviction that on holidays, one
either takes care of private correspondence or
remains silent. What can be said is that both
thinkers were concerned with completion and,
while conveying the appearance of innovation,
were perfecting and retouching the finished image
of a tradition that could not be extended any further.
There is a certain irony in the fact that, as we
can see today, all those who thought that de construction
and systems theory - constructs that
emerged with a distinct profile from the 1970s on
had ushered in a new age of thought that
2
Luhmann and Derrida
opened up unlimited horizons for theoretical
work were mistaken. In reality, both conceptual
approaches were the finished result of logical
processes that had shaped the thought of the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. In the case of Derrida,
this involved the conclusion of the linguistic
or semiological turn according to which the twentieth
century had belonged to the philosophies of
language and writing; in the case of Luhmann, on
the other hand, it was the completion of the abandonment
of philosophy called for by Wittgenstein,
achieved through a resolute withdrawal of thought
from the tradition of philosophies of the spirit and
language in order to reposition themselves in the
field of metabiology, the general logic of differences
between system and environment. What
both effects have in common with the case of
Hegel is that they use the final possibilities of a
given grammar to the full, and thus give their successors
the initially euphoric feeling of starting at
a high point. This subsequently gives way to the
alarming realization that if one starts at the peak,
the only way to continue is downwards.
3
Luhmann and Derrida
In all other respects, the differences between the
two Hegels of the twentieth century could hardly
be greater. A certain superiority on Derrida's part
is most evident in the fact that - like no other
thinker except Heidegger - he always operated at
the outermost edges of tradition, and thus kept tradition,
however fractured, on his side . This explains
the incredible effect of his work in the
academic world, where de construction proved to
be the last chance of a theory that achieves integration
through disintegration by breaking
through the boundaries of the archive, it offered a
possibility of holding it together. Luhmann, by
contrast, left the philosophical archive behind,
contenting himself with the ostensibly modest title
of a sociologist of world society. To him, the
only significance the philosophical library of the
Old Europe still had was as a reservoir of verbal
figures with which the priests and intellectuals of
former times attempted to grasp the whole. From
the perspective of general systems theory, philosophy
as a whole is an exhausted, totalizing language
game whose instruments corresponded to
4
Luhmann and Derrida
the semantic horizon of historical societies, but can
no longer do justice to the primary fact of modernity,
namely the progressive differentiation of the
social system.
It is regrettable that the two Hegels of the twentieth
century did not respond extensively and
reciprocally to each other; thus we have no comprehensive
minutes of the virtual logical summit
conference of postmodern thought. It would have
been immeasurably exciting for the intellectual
community to experience the two eminent intelligences
of our epoch interacting in a situation of
elaborated dialogue . As both Derrida and Luhmann
were of an extremely polite nature , each
would naturally have resisted the temptation to
treat the other's work reductively, let alone cannibalistically,
as is normally the case among rivals
for the highest position in the field of intellectual
observation. None the less, each would have had
to attempt assimilating though not absorptive
translations of the other into his own terms -
which, with two such masters of scepticism
towards the very concept of the own, would have
5
Luhmann and Derrida
proved a stimulating exercise , and the observers
of these translations would have had the privilege
of being able to observe the reciprocal observations
of the most conceptually powerful observers.
Luhmann certainly paid close attention to Derrida's
work, though nothing is known about
Derrida returning the observation - it would seem
that he never explicitly acknowledged the work
of the scholar from Bielefeld.
Luhmann saw Derrida's deconstruction of the
metaphysical tradition as an undertaking closely
related to his own intentions , in the sense that he
saw the same post-ontological energies at work in
it that drove his own systemic theory project. He
openly admitted that de construction was and
would remain a relevant option: that it indeed did
precisely 'what we can do now' 1 This means that
de construction is a strictly dated form of theoretical
behaviour - dated in the sense that it could
1 Niklas Luhmann, 'Dekonstruktion als Beobachtung zweiter
Ordnung' [ Deconstruction as Second-Order Observation], in
Aujsiitze und Reden [ Essays and Speeches] , ed. Oliver Jahraus
(Stuttgart: Reclam, 2001), p. 286.
6
Luhmann and Demda
only appear on the scene after the conclusion of
conventional theory's historical formation, and
thus consistently remains connected to a 'situation'
to which Luhmann assigns five attributes :
post-metaphysical, post-ontological, post-conventional,
postmodern and post-catastrophic . 2
Deconstruction, according to Luhmann, presupposes
the 'catastrophe of modernity' which
should be thought of as a shift from the form of
stability existing in traditional hierarchical-centralist
society to the form of stability found in our
modern, differentiated, multifocal society. Once
multifocality is taken as a point of departure , all
theory moves to the level of second-order observation:
one no longer attempts a direct description
of the world, but rather re-describes - and
thus deconstructs - existing descriptions of the
world. One could say that Luhmann honoured
Derrida by crediting him with the achievement of
finding a solution to the fundamental logical task
of the postmodern situation: switching from
2 Ibid., p. 286.
7
Luhmann and Derrida
stability through cenfring and solid foundations
to stability through greater flexibility and decentring.
With a sure feeling for the latent pathos of
deconstruction, Luhmann adds the following to
his concluding acknowledgement: 'Thus understood,
deconstruction will survive its own de construction
as the most relevant description of
modern society's self-description. '3
The decisive element here is the seemingly
harmless verb 'survive' In using it, Luhmann may
have touched on the motivational core of the
other Hegel's work. One could indeed think that
Derrida devoted his ambition to the development
of a form of theory that would always have a
future and the potential to become a tradition; this
would be achieved by permitting and even
demanding an application to itself, in the certainty
that it would always emerge from such a test in a
regenerated and re-consolidated state . This trick
could only be pulled off by a theory that was
always already lying in its own grave, so to speak,
3 Ibid. p. 291 .
8
Luhmann and Derrida
rising from it only for repeated burials . Could it
be that the core impulse of deconstruction was to
pursue a project of construction with the aim of
creating an undeconstructible survival machine?
