外国读者关于火炬传递引起的政治问题的比较平衡的评论
=============================
发布时间：2008-04-09 12:21
 ”Ancient civilization they may claim, but the concept of individual liberty , championed by the Anglo-Saxon, has yet to be found in the Chinese mind. So, yes let the Chinese celebrate this epoch when 2/3 of their population leave subsistence agriculture behind after 10,000 years and become townfolk. It is a real step forward, dramatic for the human race. ”Proudly by wilfred knight of orange county, usa/california 
These points illustrated above are the reasons the rest of the world hates the West. Wilfred, since when did the Anglo-Saxon values become so superior that it transcends （这个字用得好）everyone including China? Since when did the West make up only the world? When the West realise that there are 6 billion people who as are important, then the world might be better. By the way, the concept of individual liberty championed by Saxons is just a romantic view. To outsiders, Wars, divide and conquer, Opium Wars, resource theft, colonisation, economic sanctions is more akin to the West not China （这句也说得很好！）Don, Osaka, Japan
 It is a national disgrace that flown-in thugs from China have been allowed to manhandle protesting British citizens on British streets. There is no freedom of expression permitted in China, and the weakness of the London authorities has clearly allowed China to intruduce such totalitarian regime methods in London. Did they have work visas for their strongarm employment in Britain? 
China does whatever it can get away with. In Tibet, it gets away with a lot. And now even this torch relay has been badly mis-handled by the insensitive Chinese Communist officials.Susan Wong, London,
 In my opinion a country who would, out of fear and/or greed, invade an internationally-acknowledged sovereign country and cause the biggest humanitarian disaster in the 21 century is a true totalitarian regime and a threat to world peace Shawn, Oxford, UK 
hello Shawn : 
are you talking about the US and UK?Lee, Bath, SomersetLily, Leeds 
Lord Coe is a multiple olympic gold medalist, a former MP and the Chairman of the British Olympic committee 2012. You would think the Chinese officials ( and unofficials ) would do their homework and not assault a senior figure who had presumably played some part in arranging for their visit. 
Also could we please not start calling people racist. It really is pathetic. Coe merely pointed out that they did not speak english. Is it racist if I say you don't speak mandarin? The point he was making was he was making was that they shouldn't have been present in an english speaking country on official business which was to be volatile if they couldn't communicate. Not only does this episode reflect badly on the chinese but also on Brown who has made yet another huge misjudgement.Edward, London,
 it's right to have people offering protect, to the flame  to those torchbearers, China is the host of OP, it can be  should be part of that protection, why notClair, HongKong, China
 thugs. not Olympic material. not athletes. 
D. Fraser, McCall, IDaho
 he torch is the property of the IOC. Why the hell are the Chinese claiming as their own and protecting it with paramilitaries (which in a sinlge-party-state means they are POLITICAL paramilitaries). 
In my view the olympics and politics should not mix. Which is precisely why this torch-parade should be scrapped asap. It has nothing to do with sporting values, nothing to do with peace and everything to do with political propaganda. 
People seem to thing that this torch parada has been around since the Greeks. Its not. It was brought in 1936 by the Nazis specifically to act as political propaganda. It has never had anything to do with sporting values. Scrap the torch and you scrap most of the politics in the olympics.Dave L, Epsom, UK
 Watching from afar ( New Zealand ) you could spot a mile away these track suited minders had only one thing to do and that was to make sure that nothing happen to the flame regardless of who ever got in the way ! 
You will see a lot more of these security people at the Beijing Games mark my words.Jess, Tauranga, New ZealandThe Chinese security dudes are Jet-Li type Kungfu masters, I think. Lucky they were obviously ordered to only provide passive protection of the touch. Otherwise, I doubt any  peaceful  protestors could be go as near as 5 yards towards the flame. 
Plus, if you take a careful look, they actually SAVED the touch from the thug who nearly succeeded grapping it from Connie Huq  “ this is the exact point why they were there, nothing more and nothing less.E. Wong, Amsterdam, the NetherlandsNext time when Lord Coe go to China, chinese people would call him thug, because he can not speak chinese.sharon, ottawa, canada
 Photographic evidence? When it comes to Chinese thuggery, you don't need evidence, you can just make it up on the fly as always.
 keith, HK,Well,as I know,those Chinese guys are very polite.Gary, London,
 Chinese military-police have no business operating in Britain. They should not have been allowed here. Imagine the uproar in China if some our coppers had pushed the Chinese equivalent of Lord Coe out of the way. I personally think the Tibet business is a bit daft. Who elected the Dalai Lama? I find it strange how many lefties are making such a fuss about all this; I thought they liked democracy. Perhaps not. Castro? Arrafat? Tibet has been, on and off, a part of China for rather a long time, and the attacks on Han Chinese were examples of racism. The left would not condone such attacks on ethnic minorities in this country, so, again, why is it fine in Tibet? That said, it's the job of our police to stop any 'free-Tibet' hippies from getting out of hand in Britain. And as regards any rubbish from the Chinese party youth about how we haven't respected Chinese sovereignty, well, fine, I'd be more than happy to discuss that.Tony Hillbear, London, UK
 For the voices in this claiming that sports and politics should not mix: It's a bit like claiming that we live in the (politically) post-ideological society. Sports isn't politics but its certainly used as such. And right now it seems to be actually nothing more than politics no matter if (sports) people want it or not. 
The olympic games have been commericialised the last years involving more and more professional athletes. Anyone who have attended either as athlete or spectator are familiar with the commercial immanense transforming much of the spirit of these once ”political free” sports-”games”. Now it is difficult to see past the enormeous economical interests for sponsors and hosts, the simutaneous product launches and the widespread doping usage in every discipline. 
Perhaps its a pity that the games should be hijacked for the cause of the much tried Tibetians, but inversely should we completely let a sporting event take away all in the larger perspective?R.T. Hansen, Berlin, GermanyWell what were we supposed to do? let those protesting thugs put out the flame/ Not on their watch it seems. well done to our boys in blueDavid, Weymouth, Dorset
 Everyone remembers the 1968 Black Power salutes on the medal platform at the 1968 Olympics. The Beijing Olympics call for a similar silent sign of protest. No banners or T-shirts necessary, you can show you support for universal human rights (in Tibet and elsewhere!) by holding up your hand with the international sign-language sign for the letter ”R.” The ”R” stands for human RIGHTS. It is simple for anyone to do: fingers crossed, hand otherwise in a fist. (The hand sign ”R” looks like a peace sign, with the fingers tangled.) See the ”R” for rights sign here: 
http://www.alphabetandletter.com/sign.htmlA. Bonacker, east hampton, New York
 Who is this Lord Coe? Why does he take it for granted that everybody should know or know of him in the world so that he would not have been pushed away from the torch? If anybody cannot recognize him, he then branded them 'thugs'. In this case, he is no better than a thug, he is extremely arrogant. 
And I do not see anything wrong having some Chinese guards to prevent protesters from extinguishing the fire of the Olympic torch. They were not violent in London at all. I was watching TV for the whole day. The police did a very good job as well.Lily, Leeds,
 I think it would be very symbolic if somewhere along the way someone does snuff this torch as a symbol and to honor those who died trying to achieve some degree of basic human rights and the decency of freedom for Tibet. I would think it would most likely be an American who would see their way to making a world statement like this.Doug, Vancouver, Canadao Wilfred knight, orange county: 
China as a capitalistic country with a communist wrapping. It is difficult to explain but if you would ever bother to pay a visit, you would know what I am talking about. 
In my opinion a country who would, out of fear and/or greed, invade an internationally-acknowledged sovereign country and cause the biggest humanitarian disaster in the 21 century is a true totalitarian regime and a threat to world peace.Shawn, Oxford, UK
 here's no need to be racist. 
That's precisely the sort of attitude that can be rightly denounced as anti-Chinese. 
The Chinese people get the information that is approved by their government for them to get, like increasingly is the case in Russia. Despite this, many still fight for their freedoms and some are tortured and imprisoned for it. They deserve freedom just as much as we do, although any road to Chinese democracy will take many uncertain years... 
just ask Axl Rose!Chris Kavanagh, London, UK
 It's the newest export from China...paramilitary violence. Certainly one of their most accomplished domestic products! Only there's no trade agreement, so it undermines the sovereignty of every nation these thugs visit. But then, undermining the sovereignty of other peoples is another specialty of the Communist Party of China. 
Isn't it a sign that something has gone horribly wrong with these Olympics when military goons must be assigned to protect the torch? 
Will these guys be accountable to local authorities when they assault citizens who are exercising their right to demonstrate? 
From whom are they taking their orders? Are they armed?Shaun Smith, Toronto, Canada
 A group of officers?! We should complain all we want about Chinese heavies visiting our country to protect an emblem of peace and then pushing people around, including people such as Sebastian Coe! 
If you want to know why peaceful protests do not have any impact on these kinds of people, just look at the photos. And imagine this lot is coming around your house to carry off one of your loved ones to enforce Chinese rule!iain carstairs, bedford, uk
 ”Questions are now being asked as to who authorised their presence as the torch made its journey through London, with the Conservatives last night demanding clarification from the Government.” 
Who cares! 
'm just waiting for my next supertanker full of cheapo plastic toys to dock at Dover.... 
I'll certainly be voting Labour May 1st!Jez W, Leeds,
 Nice one. Imagine a team of South African secret police escorting a torch around London during Apartheid, manhandling civilians and British police. Sound far-fetched? You really couldn't make this up. 
Congrats Gordon, you're doing a really fine job. 'Personality defects' is putting it mildly.Wilberforce, London,Phil - get a grip - i think you have your own slightly twisted agenda.bob smith, Clytha,
 Imagine what would have happened if they weren't there? I'm tired of these evidently clear double standards exhorted by the vast majority. The Olympics are a sporting event, if you do not agree with China's activities in Tibet, protest, peacefully. But these violent anti-Chinese protests are no better than violent actions of the Chinese in Tibet (and elsewhere in China for that matter, why is there is no reference to the crises and abuses of the millions in Xinjiang for example). Does anyone think they can 'shame' China into 'giving up' 'its' land? Get a grip on reality. The only change that will affect China is when all of us stop buying cheap Chinese imports (and we all have them including the protesters) and the Chinese people want change themselves. Till then stop complaining about a group of Chinese officers assigned to protecting torchbearers from the violent protesters.Farrukh, Woking, UK
 Joy of Joys ! 
Brits get a taste of real communist fascism on their own doorstep. 
Chinese goons acting out as bully boys- well, really what did you expect from a totalitarian state ? 
Did you learn nothing from Hitler's show ? 
Ancient civilization they may claim, but the concept of individual liberty , championed by the Anglo-Saxon, has yet to be found in the Chinese mind. 
So, yes let the Chinese celebrate this epoch when 2/3 of their population leave subsistence agriculture behind after 10,000 years and become townfolk. It is a real step forward, dramatic for the human race. 
But their very actions just show how far rhe Chinese have yet to travel, before they deserve a seat amongst the civilized nations of the West.
