失去那个狗屁的aura，作品才有展示价值
=============================
发布时间：2011-05-04 11:58
 1-格罗斯读本雅明的《技术复制时代的艺术品》时，得出这样一种看法：百分百的复制就是原作；复制品也一定是原作；从来就没有复制品。这个看法我支持，但看起来很生硬，需要一些认识上的支持。带着这个愿望，我重新去读了本雅明的这个文本。下面是我阅读后得到的见解。
本雅明首先是用了修辞：作品的“此时此地”是其本真性之盖章，这才有aura，这话没错，但我们这指的是作品的膜拜价值带来的aura，而他是要来谈展示价值，后者才是现代艺术品的公共价值。如果要谈后者，那么，摄影和电影就是新例！我们失去了aura，请君别乱哀叹，我们是因此而得到了展示价值！！只有先失去，才得到这个更宝贵的东西-----现代艺术家，你们的风光，就靠的是这个！！！你们要aura，那么你们就去做工匠吧！
这展示价值不光只是作品里内在的，而首先是指其对于每一个现代观众的当场的“本真复制”。相机和电影摄影机将美术馆的观众架空，观众被置换为拍摄镜头（lens）：集体作者做给一个固定的观众也就是镜头lens看，然后再让观众来策展！这丰盛的筵席是为每一个观众准备的。展示价值的根本，就是：每一个作品是可以被无数次展出，次次有新意的，且谁都可以来做它的策展人！！！！
2-摄影后照片洗印的过程中会产生摄影师肉眼本来没看见的东西，“复制品”会多于、丰富于艺术家咬定的自己的原作，快门里会放进比作者想要的更多的东西。如果说摄影师说我只要原作，那他们是永远也要不到它的，因为他们拍的时候看到的，永远少于最后他们拿到的。从这个本雅明的著名文本里对于摄影的这种乐观论述，我也终于理解了巴尔特说的那句名言“摄影不是艺术”：因为拍的人不是艺术家，艺术家是那镜头，而你怎么肯承认它是艺术家呢！所以，我们只好说摄影不是艺术了！但我们可以策展摄影的。
而相比之下，绘画就是在其本体上剔除所有的偶然细节，显得太逻辑：绘画里只有艺术家想要的东西。是的，的确也有艺术家想要的东西在里面，但是，绘画与观众的遭遇和交集，能与电影和摄影与其观众的遭遇和交集相比的么？看到电影院里的观众，我们怎么还敢对走进美术馆的观众说：你们是自由的，你们其实也是策展人！
这里，我觉得本雅明有一句潜台词：只有具有展示价值的艺术品，才是当代艺术品。而绘画，哪怕是当代中国绘画，可能还只具有膜拜价值（cultic value），有的艺术家神秘得很，要的可能就只是膜拜价值（苏维埃先锋艺术家要的就只是展示价值，白给，自己还要出力去推广和宣传）：要作者有名，要卖得很贵，它才有震撼力，这叫什么狗屁艺术品？？？？？我都怀疑许多收藏家和炒家正在请杀手做掉刘小东他们，像CIA干掉本拉登那样地干掉他们，因为，这样他们手里的作品币值可以翻几番，否则，刘小东的肉身就成为画纸的金融抵押品和恋物癖们的sujet petit a。膜拜价值就是一定要作者肉身和名望到场，也要让占有者的肉身和地位到场才，显现出像庙里的香烟那样的aura的价值，而本雅明认为，我们乐道的那个狗屁aura，是要作品先有这个膜拜价值，才灵现，这是倒退。所以，本雅明这本书里根本没有在哀叹我们时代的失去aura，不，他是看到了我们像贞操那样快速失去aura中的大大的好处。我真的不能理解为什么像陈丹青那样的小资作者读什么都能读出这种失去aura之后的痛心疾首来。为什么？我在《技术复制时代的艺术品》里是只读到了乐观和快乐的期待。
这真的是太有意思了！本雅明是带着幸灾乐祸的腔调来写出这种展价值的打败或覆盖膜拜价值的。我读出，他内心里是判了绘画死刑的：原话是：绘画被绊住、捕捉住了（《技》，XV），成为卡在DVD播放时放不过去的那一刻里的东西了；在电影面前，绘画像是在竹篮打水平。在〈技〉中，他引用瓦雷里：画家是在弄文学！！！！！后来，在1938年他看法国国家图书馆的中国画展览之后，他得出这样的结论：中国画看来画的是文学，但他们的宣纸上的文学看来也是思想；画家只有同时去成为诗人和思想家，才有出路。中国画里那云彩般的一团，就是思想，画家是在它之中思想，画画是在思想中思想。西方式绘画面对技术复制（不是复印机，而是镜头和很有化学甚至自然反应的洗印机），是不堪一击的。
3-论到电影时，他认为这么多“作者”同时面对表演的拍摄和剪片，演员可以在不同时地作出姿势拍下来，却能被剪到一起放进同一个时间里，这种做法，对于我们的“艺术品”概念的打击，决不会只是一点点！
有了摄影和电影，我们来谈“艺术品”，来说艺术品应该是怎么样的，可是要大大而大大地小心了！
电影永远打破了艺术家在工作室里凭灵感一气呵成一个艺术品这种迷信！电影里把含了一切艺术制的可能。而绘画怎么向电影靠拢？绘画只能向电影缴械。
4-在电影这种艺术形式里，一个巨大的装置（apparatus）正在捕捉全体观众，但同时，一种巨大的装置也交给了观众。电影实现了资本主义对我们的终极的景观统治，但电影也同时给我们每一个人提供了终止这一全球景观装置的可能性。我认为，在这里，德波和阿甘本是与本雅明接通了。
5-
画是记号和字两者构成。记号被合成，一有构图，就出现字。构图本身就形成字。构图是通过文字来进行的。在构图中，字超越了记号。
字是隐埋在绘画语言这一媒体中的。字进来，是不利用画本身的任何东西的。画本身是依照构图和前来主导的字，来命名（本雅明，《论绘画，或符号与记号》）。
附-展示价值：
1-The here and now of the original underlies the concept of its authenticity,
and on the latter in turn is founded the idea of a tradition which
has passed object down as the same, identical thing to the present
day. The whole sphere of authenticity eludes technological-and of
course tIot only technological-rel)roduction. But whereas the authentic
work retains its full authority in the face of a reproduction made by
hand, which it brands a forgery, this is not the case with technological
reproduction. The reason is twofold. First, technological reproduction
is more independent of the original than is manual reproduction.
For example, in photography it can bring out aspects of the original that
are accessible only to the lens (which is adjustable and can easily change
viewpoint) but not to the human eye; or it can use certain processes, such
as enlargement or slow motion, to record images which escape natural
optics altogether. This is the first reason. Second, technological reproduction
can place the copy of the original in situations which the original itself
cannot attain. Above ali, it enables the original to meet the recipient
halfway, whether in the form of a photograph or in that ＜1 gramophone record. The cathedral leaves its site to be received in the studio of an art
lover; the choral work performed in an auditorium or in the open air is
enjoyed in a private room.
2-What, then, is the aura? A strange tissue of space and time: the unique
apparition of a distance, however near it may be.s To follow with the
eye-while resting on a summer afternoon-a mountain range on the horizon
or a branch that casts its shadow on the beholder is to breathe the
aura of those mountains, of that branch. In the light of this description,
we can readily grasp the social basis of the aura's present decay. It rests
on two circumstances, both linked to the increasing emergence of the
masses and the growing intensity of their movements. Namely: the desire
of the present-day masses to ”get closer” to things, and their equally passionate
concern for overcoming each thing's uniqueness [Oberwindung
des Einmaligen jeder Gegebenheit] by assimilating it as a reproduction.
Every day the urge grows stronger to get hold of an object at close range
in an image [Bild], or, better, in a facsimile [Abbild], a reproduction. And
the reproduction [Reprodul?tion], as offered by illustrated magazines and
newsreels, differs unmistakably from the image. Uniqueness and permanence
are as closely entwined in the latter as are transitoriness and repeatability
in the former. The stripping of the veil from the object, the destruction
of the aura, is the signature of a perception whose ”sense for all that is the same in the world? so increased that, by means of reproduction,
it extracts sameness even from what is unique. Thus is manifested
in the field of perception what in the theoretical sphere is noticeable
in the increasing significance statistics. The alignment of reality
with the masses and of the masses with reality is a process of immeasurable
importance for both thinking perception.
3-In photogl'at)h)~ exhibition value begins to drive bad? cult value on all
fronts. But cult value does not give way without resistance. It falls back
to a last entrenchment: the human countenance. It is no accident that the
portrait is central to early photography. In the cult of remembrance of
dead or absent loved ones, the cult value of the image finds its last refuge.
In the fleeting expression of a human face, the aura beckons from early
photographs for the last time. This is what gives them their melancholy
and incomparable beauty. But as the human being withdraws from the
photographic image, exhibition value for the first time shows its superiority
to cult value. To have this development its local habitation
constitutes the unique significance of Atget, who, around 1900, took
photographs of deserted Paris streets.!2 It has justly been said that he
photographed them like scenes of crimes. A crime scene, too, is deserted;
it is photographed for the purpose of establishing evidence. With Atget,
photographic records begin to be evidence in the historical trial [Prozess].
This constitutes their hidden political significance. They demand a specific
kind of reception. Free-floating contemplation is no longer appropriate
to them. They unsettle the viewer; he feels challenged to find a particular
way to approach them. At the same time, illustrated magazines begin
to put up signposts for him-whether these are right or wrong is irrelevant.
For the first time, captions become obligatory. And it is clear that
they have a character altogether different from the titles of paintings. The
directives given by captions to those looking at images in illustrated magazines
soon become even more precise and commanding in films, where
the way each single image is understood seems prescribed by the sequence
of all the preceding images.
4-Painting, by its nature, cannot provide an object of simultaneous collective
reception, as architecture has always been able to do, as the epic
poem could do at one time, and as film is able to do today. And although
direct conclusions about the social role of painting cannot be drawn from
this fact alone, it does have a strongly adverse effect whenever painting
is led by special circumstances, as if against its nature, to confront the
masses directly. In the churches and monasteries of the Middle Ages, and
at the princely courts up to about the end of the eighteenth century,
the collective reception of paintings took place not simultaneously but
in a manifoldly graduated and hierarchically mediated way. If that has
changed, the change testifies to the special conflict in which painting has
become enmeshed by the technological reproducibility of the image. And
while efforts have been made to present paintings to the masses in galleries
and salons, this mode of reception gives the masses no means of organizing
and regulating their response. Thus, the same public which reacts
progressively to a slapstick comedy inevitably displays a backward attitude
toward Surrealism.
