对于动物的完全的人化，就是对人的完全的动物化
=============================
发布时间：2009-10-26 00:27
 Today, at a distance of nearly seventy years, it is clear for anyone
who is not in absolutely bad faith that there are no longer historical
tasks that can be taken on by, or even simply assigned to, men.
It was in some ways already evident starting with the end of the
First World War that the European nation-states were no longer
capable of taking on historical tasks and that peoples themselves
were bound to disappear. We completely misunderstand the
nature of the great totalitarian experiments of the twentieth century
if we see them only as a carrying out of the nineteenth-century
nation-states' last great tasks: nationalism and imperialism.
The stakes are now different and much higher, for it is a question
of taking on as a task the very facti cal existence of peoples, that is,
in the last analysis, their bare life. Seen in this light, the totalitarianisms
of the twentieth century truly constitute the other face of
the Hegelo-Kojevian idea of the end of history: man has now
reached his historical teios and, for a humanity that has become
animal again, there is nothing left but the depoliticization of
human societies by means of the unconditioned unfolding of the
oikonomia, or the taking on of biological life itself as the supreme
political (or rather impolitical) task.
It is likely that the times in which we live have not emerged
from this aporia. Do we not see around and among us men and
peoples who no longer have any essence or identity-who are
delivered over, so to speak, to their inessentiality and their inactivity
{inoperosita}-and who grope everywhere, and at the cost of
gross falsifications, for an inheritance and a task, an inheritance as
task? Even the pure and simple relinquishment of all historical
tasks (reduced to simple functions of internal or international
policing) in the name of the triumph of the economy, often today
takes on an emphasis in which natural life itself and its well-being
seem to appear as humanity's last historical task-if indeed it
makes sense here to speak of a ”task.”
The traditional historical potentialities-poetry, religion, philosophy-
which from both the Hegelo-Kojevian and Heideggerian
perspectives kept the historico-political destiny of peoples
awake, have long since been transformed into cultural spectacles
and private experiences, and have lost all historical efficacy. Faced
with this eclipse, the only task that still seems to retain some seriousness
is the assumption of the burden-and the ”total management”-
of biological life, that is, of the very animality of
man. Genome, global economy, and humanitarian ideology are
the three united faces of this process in which posthistorical
humanity seems to take on its own physiology as its last, impolitical
mandate.
It is not easy to say whether the humanity that has taken upon
itself the mandate of the total management of its own animality is
still human, in the sense of that humanitas which the anthropological
machine produced by de-ciding every time between man
and animal; nor is it clear whether the well-being of a life that can
no longer be recognized as either human or animal can be felt as
fulfilling. To be sure, such a humanity, from Heidegger's perspective,
no longer has the form of keeping itself open to the undisconcealed
of the animal, but seeks rather to open and secure the
not-open in every domain, and thus closes itself to its own openness,
forgets its humanitas, and makes being its specific disinhibitor.
The total humanization of the animal coincides with a
total animalization of man（《开放的人和动物》，76-77）。. 
