巴迪厄：哲学征用电影：哲学电影是一种群众哲学
=============================
发布时间：2012-02-12 01:37
 Cinema as a Democratic Emblem1
by Alain Badiou
Philosophy only exists insofar as there are paradoxical relations, relations which fail to connect, or should not connect.  When every connection is naturally legitimate, philosophy is impossible or in vain.
Philosophy is the violence done by thought to impossible relations.
Today, which is to say ”after Deleuze,” there isa clear requisitioning of philosophy by cinema-- or of cinema by philosophy.  It is therefore certain that cinema offers us paradoxical relations, entirely improbable connections.
Which ones?
The preformed philosophical response comes down to saying that cinema is an untenable relation between total artifice and total reality.  Cinema simultaneously offers the possibility of a copy of reality and the entirely artificial dimension of this copy.  With contemporary technologies, cinema is capable of producing the real artifice of the copy of a false copy of the real, or again, the false real copy of a false real. And other variations.  This amounts to saying that cinema has become the immediate form (or ”technique”) of an ancient paradox, that of the relations between being and appearance (which are far more fundamental than the relations everywhere exhibited between the virtual and the actual).  We can thus proclaim cinema to be an ontological art. Many critics, André Bazin in particular, have been saying this for a long time.
I would like to enter into the question in an infinitely simpler and more empirical manner, removed from all philosophical preformation, starting with the elucidation of a statement: cinema is a ”mass art.”
The syntagm ”mass art” can be given an elementary definition: an art is a ”mass art” if the masterpieces, the artistic productions that the erudite (or dominant, whatever) culture declares incontestable, are seen and liked by millions of people from all social groups at the very moment of their creation.
Adding ”at the very moment of their creation” is especially important, because we know that we are dominated by a melancholy historicism, which creates a pure effect of pastness.  Millions of people, regardless of their social background (apart of course from the base proletariat) are able to go to museums, because they like the icons of the past as treasures, for the modern passion for tourism extends to a kind of tourism of treasures（忧郁的历史主义，制造纯粹的过去之效果，走进美术馆与组团旅游是同一回事儿了（阿甘本：对过去也抱一种色情的窥视））.  It is not of this kind of tourism that I am speaking, but of the millions of people who love an exceptional work at the very moment of its appearance.  Yet we have, in the short history of cinema, incontestable examples of such love, examples that can only be compared to the public triumph of the great Greek tragedies.  Take, for example, the great films of Chaplin.  They have been seen throughout the world, even in the homes of Eskimos, or projected on tents in the desert.  Everybody immediately understood that these films spoke in the profound and decisive way that I have proposed to call (when writing on Beckett's prose) ”generic humanity,” or humanity subtracted from its differences.  The character of the Tramp, perfectly placed, filmed in a close frontal manner, in a familiar context, is no less a representative of generic ”popular” humanity for an African than for a Japanese or for an Eskimo.
It would be wrong to believe this kind of example is limited to the comic or burlesque genre, which has always been able to reflect the vital energy of the people, the strength and cunning of social survival.  We could as easily cite an extraordinarily concentrated film of staggering formal invention, doubtless one of the greatest existing cinematic poems: Murnau's Sunrise.  This pure masterpiece was a phenomenal success in the United States, a sort of Titanic, without the industrial flavour.
Cinema is without a doubt capable of being a mass art on a scale which suffers no comparison with any other art.  Certainly in the nineteenth century there were mass writers, mass poets: Victor Hugo in France, for example, or Pushkin in Russia.  They had, and still have, millions of readers.  However, the scale -- at the moment of their creation -- is incomparable to that of the great success of cinema.
The point is thus the following: ”mass art” fixes a paradoxical relation.  Why?  Because ”mass” is a political category, or more precisely a category of activist democracy, of communism.  The Russian revolutionaries were able to define their actions in terms of a time when ”the masses climbed onto the stage of History.”  We usually oppose ”mass democracy” to representative and constitutional democracy.  ”Mass” is an essential political category.  （（M）ao) said that ”the masses, the masses alone, are creators of universal history.”
However, ”art”, which is the other half of the syntagm ”mass art,” is and can only be an aristocratic category.
To say that ”art” is an aristocratic category is not a judgement.  We simply note that ”art” comprises the idea of formal creation, of visible novelty in the history of forms, and therefore requires the means of comprehending creation as such, necessitating a differential education, a minimal proximity to the history of the art concerned and to the vicissitudes of its grammar.  A long and often unrewarding apprenticeship.  Broadening of the mind.  Pleasures, certainly, but pleasures which are sophisticated, constructed, acquired. 
In ”mass art” we have the paradoxical relation between a pure democratic element (on the side of irruption and evental energy) and an aristocratic element (on the side of individual education, of differential locations of taste).
All the arts of the twentieth century have been avant-garde.  Painting was an avant-garde art and only ceases to be so at that crepuscular moment when it is introduced into museums.  Music was an avant-garde art, and, from the days of Schenberg, has not ceased to be so (unless we also call ”music” the groaning of popular music).  Poetry exists today only as an avant-garde art.  We can say that the twentieth century is the century of avant-gardes.  But we can also say that it is the century of the greatest mass art that has ever existed.
The simple form of the paradoxical relation: the first great art which is mass in its essence appears and develops in a time which is the time of the avant-gardes.  The derived form: cinema imposes impracticable relations between aristocracy and democracy, between invention and familiarity, between novelty and general taste.
It is for this reason that philosophy takes an interest in cinema.  Because it imposes a vast and obscure complex of paradoxical relations.  ”To think cinema” comes down to forcing the relation, to arranging the concepts which, under the constraint of real films, shift the established rules of the connection.
I believe, however, that there have been five major attempts at such a displacement.  Or rather, five different ways of entering into the problem: ”to think cinema as mass art.” Firstly, from the paradox of the image.  This is the classic entry which I mentioned at the beginning: the ontological art.  The second traces the paradox of time, of the filmic visibility of time.  The third examines the difference of cinema, its strange connection to the established system of the fine arts.  To put it another way: the paradox of the seventh art.  The fourth establishes cinema at the border of art and non-art, its paradox being that of artistic impurity.  The fifth proposes an ethical paradox: cinema as reservoir of figures of conscience, as popular phenomenology of every situation wherein we must choose.
