巴迪厄：哲学的死和复生
=============================
发布时间：2010-03-15 00:24
 Philosophy is always behind! Philosophy is always trying to catch up with non- philosophical novelties! And I would have to say: correct! That was in fact Hegel's
conclusion. Philosophy is the bird of wisdom, and the bird of wisdom is the owl. But the owl flies off only when the day is over. Philosophy is the discipline which
comes after the day of knowledge, the day of experiences, at the beginning of the night. And apparently our problem, the problem of the development of philosophy, is
solved. There are two cases. First case: a new morning of creative experiences in science, politics, art or love is coming. And we shall have a new evening for
philosophy. Second case: our civilization is exhausted, and the only future we can imagine is a dark one, a future of perpetual dusk. So the future of philosophy will be
its slow death, its slow death in the night. Philosophy will be reduced to what we can read at the beginning of a beautiful text by Samuel Beckett, Company: ”A voice is
speaking in the dark.” A voice without meaning, without destination.
And in fact, from Hegel and Auguste Comte to Nietzsche, Heidegger or Derrida, not to mention Wittgenstein and Carnap, we can find the philosophical idea of a
probable death of philosophy, in any case in its classical form, the metaphysical one.
I could stop my lecture here, and say with my hair standing straight up on my head like a singer in the Punk style: no future! After that we would all drink the alcohol of
nihilism.
But there remain some little difficulties.
The first one, which is perhaps too formal, perhaps a sophistry, is that the idea of the end of philosophy has been a typical philosophical idea for a long time. Moreover,
it is often a positive idea. For Hegel, philosophy is at its end because philosophy can finally understand what an absolute knowledge is. For Marx, philosophy as an
interpretation of the world can be replaced by a concrete transformation of this same world. For Nietzsche, the negative abstraction of old philosophy has to be
destroyed to liberate a true vital affirmation, a big ”Yes!” to all that exists. And for the analytical current, metaphysical sentences, which are pure nonsense, have to be
deconstructed in favor of clear propositions and arguments under the paradigm of modem logic.
In all these cases we see that the great declarations concerning the death of philosophy in general, and of metaphysics in particular, are most probably a rhetorical
means of introducing a new way, or a new goal, into philosophy itself. The best means of saying: I am a new philosopher, is probably to say: philosophy is finished,
philosophy is dead. So I propose to begin something absolutely new. Not philosophy, but thinking! Not philosophy, but vital potency! Not philosophy, but a new
rational language! In fact: not old philosophy, but my own new philosophy.
So there is a possibility that the development of philosophy must always be in the form of resurrection. The old philosophy, like the old man, is dead, but this death is
in fact the birth of the new man, the new philosopher. 
