巴迪厄：对哲学的近况和它的未来责任的一次干净索的总结
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-21 23:30
 1-Rimbaud uses a very strange expression: les révoltes logiques, ”logical revolts”. Philosophy is something like that: ”logical revolts”. Philosophy sets up thought against injustice, against the defective state of the world and life. But it sets thought up in a movement which conserves and defends argument and reason, and which ultimately always proposes a new logic.
Mallarme gives us this aphorism: ”a thought begets a throw of the dice”. It seems to me that this enigmatic formula also designates philosophy. Because philosophy proposes to think the universal, which is true in fact for all thinking, but philosophy does this from within a commitment which is always somehow a risk, a commitment which chance always plays a role in.
2-I think that the contemporary world, our world, exerts an intense pressure on these four dimensions of the desire of philosophy.
As far as the dimension of revolt is concerned, this world, our world, the ”western” world (with as many inverted commas as you want), this world does not engage in thought as revolt and this for two reasons. First because this world decrees itself already free. It presents itself as ”the free world”, and this is even the name it gives itself, an ”isle” of liberty within a planet otherwise reduced to slavery, or devastated. But at the same time, as you know, this world, our world, standardizes and commercializes the stakes of this liberty. It projects them into monetary uniformity, with such success that our world does not have to ordain the revolt to be free since it guarantees us this liberty, nor the use of this liberty, since this use is, in reality, coded, oriented or channelled by the infinite glitter of merchandise. This is why this world exerts an intense pressure against the very idea that thinking can be insubordination or revolt.
As for the dimension of logic, our world exerts a strong pressure on it too, essentially because it is submitted to the profoundly illogical regime of communication. Communication transmits to us a universe made up of disconnected images and incoherent remarks. Communication undoes all relations and all principles, transforming what happens into a confused motley excluding any reference whatever. And what is perhaps even more distressing, mass communication presents the world to us as a spectacle devoid of memory, a spectacle in which new images and new remarks appear to cover, erase and forget the very thing that has just been said and shown. A process which exerts considerable pressure on the resoluteness of thinking's fidelity to logic.
As for the universal dimension, our world is no longer suited to it because, as we know, it is an essentially specialized and fragmentary world . It is split up in response to the demands of the innumerable ramifications of the technical configuration of things, of the apparatus of production, of the distribution of salaries, of the diversity of functions and skills. And the requirements of this specialization and fragmentation make it difficult to perceive what might be given as transversal or universal, or what might be valid for all thinking.
Finally we have the dimension of risk: our world does not favor commitments or risky decisions, because, little by little, we are losing the capacity to submit our existence to the perils of chance. Existence requires a more and more elaborate calculation. Life is devoted to calculating security, and this obsession with calculating security is contrary to the Mallarmean hypothesis that a thought begets a throw of the dice, because in such a world there is infinitely too much risk in throwing the dice.
The desire for philosophy, then, encounters in our world four principal obstacles. These are the reign of merchandise, the reign of communication, the need for technical specialization and the necessity for realistic calculations about security. How then can philosophy take on this challenge? And is it capable of such a challenge? The answer must be sought in the state of philosophy. What is the state of contemporary philosophy?
3-We are subjected to the media's inconsistency of images and commentaries. What can be opposed to that? I do not think that anything can be opposed to it except the patient search for at least one truth, without which the essential illogicism of media communication will impose what we might call its temporal carnival. Philosophy requires that we throw the dice against the obsession for security, that we interrupt the calculus of life determined by this obsession. But what chance has it to win, except in the name of a value which ordains this risk and gives to it a minimum of consistency and weight? And there again I believe it is vain to imagine that, in the absence of a principle of truth, one can oppose to the calculus of life an existential gamble, which will give rise to something that can be called a liberty.
That is really our problem. Can the four dimensions of the desire for philosophy be maintained in the world such as it is? Can we maintain the dimensions of revolt, logic, universality and risk against the four contemporary obstacles: merchandise, communication, technical division and the obsession with security? I submit that this cannot be done within the framework of the hermeneutic, analytic or post-modem options. I think these options are too strongly committed to the equivocalness of meaning and the plurality of languages. I would say that these three orientations are too compatible with our world to be able to sustain the rupture or the distance that philosophy requires.
4-We do not fundamentally need a philosophy of the structure of things. We need a philosophy open to the irreducible singularity of what happens, a philosophy that can be fed and nourished by the surprise of the unexpected. It must be a philosophy of the event and that too is required of philosophy by the world as it is.
5-It seems to me then, that what is demanded today of the poor night watchmen is a philosophy of singularity, a philosophy of contemporary reasoning and a philosophy of the event. That is a program in itself. To accomplish this program, I think we must go beyond the three main tendencies I have just described. We need a more determined and more imperative philosophy, but one that is at the same time more modest, more remote from the world and more descriptive. A philosophy which is a rational intertwining of the singularity of the event and of truth. A philosophy open to chance then, but a chance submitted to the law of reason, a philosophy maintaining conditionless principles, conditionless but submitted to a non-theological law.
And this will enable us to propose a new doctrine on the subject (and I think this is the essential objective). We will be able to say what a subject is in other terms than those of Descartes, Kant or Hegel. This subject will be singular and not universal, and it will be singular because it is always the event which constitutes its truth.
In view of this program, it can be certainly said that the metaphysics of truth is ruined and classical rationalism is insufficient. But the deconstruction of metaphysics and the contestation of rationalism are also insufficient. The world needs philosophy to be re-founded on the combined and blended ruins of metaphysics and modern criticism of metaphysics.
http://www.lacan.com/badesire.html
