巴迪厄哲学自传（一）
=============================
发布时间：2009-09-27 12:15
 _Philosophy as Biography
Alain Badiou
THE SYMPTOM
Universalism versus globalization. This at least will be our US chapter - to be read as United Symptoms - Jacques-Alain Miller
..................................................EDITORIAL by J.A.
Author’s Bio
 VIDEO Version
Nietzsche wrote that a philosophy is always the biography of the
philosopher. Maybe a biography of the philosopher by the philosopher
himself is a piece of philosophy. So I shall tell you nine stories taken
of my private life, with their philosophical morality… The first story is
the story of the father and the mother.
My father was an alumnus of the cole Normale Supérieure and
agrégé of mathematics: my mother an alumna of the cole Normale
Supérieure and agrégée of French literature. I am an alumnus of the
cole Normale Supérieure and agrégé, but agrege of what, of
philosophy, that is to say, probably, the only possible way to assume
the double filiation and circulate freely between the literary maternity
and the mathematical paternity. This is a lesson for philosophy itself
: the language of philosophy always constructs its own space
between the matheme and the poem, between the mother and the
father, after all.
Someone saw that very clearly, my colleague, the French analytic
philosopher Jacques Bouveresse, from the Collège de France. In a
recent book in which he paid me the horror of speaking of me, he
compared me to a five-footed rabbit and says in substance: ”This
five-footed rabbit that Alain Badiou is runs at top speed in the
direction of mathematic formalism, and then, all of a sudden, taking
an incomprehensible turn, he goes back on his steps and runs at the
same speed to throw himself into literature.” Well, yes, that’s how
with a father and a mother so well distributed, one turns into a
rabitt.
Now the second story: about mother and philosophy.
 Political Texts
The University in the
New Reich
Martin Heidegger
Extimity
Jacques-Alain Miller 
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 2 of 10
My mother was very old and my father was not in Paris. I would
take her out to eat in a restaurant. She would tell me on these
occasions everything she had never told me. It was the final
expressions of tenderness, which are so moving, that one has with
one’s very old parents. One evening, she told me that even before
meeting my father, when she was teaching in Algeria, she had a
passion, a gigantic passion, a devouring passion, for a philosophy
teacher. This story is absolutely authentic. I listened to it, obviously,
in the position you can imagine, and I said to myself: well, that’s it,
I have done nothing else except accomplish the desire of my mother,
that the Algerian philosopher had neglected. He had gone off with
someone else and I had done what I could to be the consolation for
my mother’s terrible pain — which had subsisted underneath it all
even until she was eighty-one.
The consequence I draw for philosophy is that, contrary to the usual
assertion according to which “the end of metaphysics” you know, is
being accomplished, and all that, philosophy precisely can not have
an end, because it is haunted, from within itself, by the necessity to
take one more step within a problem that already exists. And I
believe that this is its nature. The nature of philosophy is that
something is eternally being bequeathed to it. It has the
responsibility of this bequeathal. Your are always treating the
bequeathal itself, always taking one more step in the determination
of what was thus bequeathed to you. As myself, in the most
unconscious manner, I never did anything as a philosopher except
respond to an appeal that I had not even heard.
The third story is about the famous notion of engagement.
I arrive in Paris in 1955, during the beginning of the war in Algeria.
The horrors of this war that are today coming into the open - mass
murders, torture, razzia, systematic rapes - are well known to
everyone. Nevertheless, we are a small number in 1955, a very small
number to want stop these horrors, to be against the war in Algeria.
We demonstrate, from time to time, boulevard Saint-Michel, shouting
”Peace in Algeria!”, and when we get to the end of the street, the
police are waiting for us, striking us with their cloaks, and we were
joyfully knocked senseless. What is strange is that we could not say
anything but this: we have to do it again. And yet, I can tell you
this, the “pelerine” cloak is not particularly gay. I even think I prefer
to be clubbed. But we had to do it again, because that’s what the
pure present is: wanting the end of this war, as few as we were to
share this wanting. I drew the conviction that philosophy exists if it
takes charge of the quick of the contemporary. It is not simply a
question of engagement, or a question of political exteriority, but that
something of the contemporary is always raw, and philosophy must
testify to this raw or take place within it, however sophisticated its
intellectual production be.
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 3 of 10
intellectual production be.
The story number four is about love and religion.
Before coming to Paris, I lived in a province, I am a provincial who
came to Paris a bit late. And one of the traits that characterized my
provincial youth is that a majority of the girls were still raised in
religion. These girls were still kept or reserved for an interesting
destiny. Which gave an important figure to the masculine parade:
the different manners to shine in front of these girls still pious, the
principal of these being to refute the existence of God. This was an
important exercise of seduction, both because it was transgress! ve,
and rhetorically brilliant when one had the nieans of doing it.
Before conquering their virtues, the souls had to be yanked out of
the Church. Which of the two is the worst, that’s for the priests to
decide. But out of this conies the idea, that I had very early, that the
most argumentative, the most abstract philosophy also always
constitutes a seduction. A seduction whose basis is sexual, no doubt
about it. Of course, philosophy argues against the seduction of
images and I remain Platonist on this point. But it also argues in
order to seduce. We can thus understand the Socratic function of
corruption of the youth. Corrupting youth means being seductively
hostile to the normal regime of seduction. I maintain and I repeat
that is the destiny of philosophy to corrupt the youth, to teach it
that immediate seductions have little value, but also that superior
seductions exist. In the end, the young man who knows how to
refute the existence of God is more seductive than the one who could
only propose to the girl. a game of tennis. It’s a good reason to
become a philosopher.
This is what has become the place of the question of love, as a key
question of philosophy itself, exactly in the sense it already had for
Plato in Symposium. The question of love is necessarily at the heart
of philosophy, because it governs the question of its power, the
question of its address to its public, the question of its seductive
strength. On this point, I believe I have followed Socrates’s very
difficult direction: “the one who follows the path of total revelation
must begin at an early age to be taken by the beauty of bodies”. 
