巴迪厄：FRAGMENTS OF A PUBLIC DIARY ON THE AMERICAN WAR AGAINST IRAQ
=============================
发布时间：2009-09-27 00:18
 University of Paris-VII Jussieu, Lecture Hall 44,
(February 26, 2003)
War and Time
“A present is lacking,” said Mallarme. This is our problem in its entirety: how
do we identify, in ourselves and beyond ourselves, the infinity of a present?
For what is presented to us as a present is only the perpetual instant of
absence, pleasure [jouissance] carefully calibrated, pleasure that can be bought
and paid for.
Since long ago, war has been what historically attests to the present. This
has been so for at least three reasons:
The temporal order. We’ve always said “the pre-war,” “the postwar,” as
though the moment of war, a pure present, fixed the long forms of the before
and the after.
The decision. In forms that are, admittedly, sometimes suspect, war is
what decides, and in this sense what determines the present of politics.
Clausewitz thought that battle, fought under the authority of someone firmly
decisive, is what tips the balance into the present of war. Carl Schmitt
generalized this vision of things.
Exception. Especially in the distribution of images, war is the fraternal
sharing of exception. It places the community outside of the usual rules. To
share danger is to share the present itself.
Yet, I would like to propose that the American (“western”?) wars that
took place after the fall of the USSR — from the Gulf War to the projected
invasion of Iraq, including the attack on Serbia and the aggression against
Afghanistan — have as their defining characteristic precisely that they do not
constitute a present of any kind. They are wars whose aim is to protect, to
endure, and for this very reason to destroy what is not homogeneous with this
duration, this protection — the protection, that is, of “western” comfort,
pleasure [jouissance] measured out in millimeters. They are wars that are
entirely sterile with regard to the temporal order.
Contemporary French and Francophone Studies Vol. 8, No. 3 Summer 2004, pp. 223—238
ISSN 1740-9292 print/ISSN 1477-2876  2004 Taylor  Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals DOI: 10.1080/1026021042000247045
224 CONTEMPORARY FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE STUDIES
Let’s begin by situating them. At what point are we in the general history
of wars? We are not living in the postwar (the World War of 1939—45), but
rather in the post-postwar.
The postwar was expressed in different ways, all of them now obsolete.
We used to refer, for example, to the cold war between two superpowers,
the USA and the USSR. The soft collapse of the USSR (which elsewhere I’ve
called an “obscure disaster”) brought that arrangement to an end. We were able
to refer to the revolutionary isolation of China, which is also its distant aura.
Deng Hsiao Ping’s pragmatism retained none of it, only commercial frenzy
and corruption. We could refer to the struggles for national liberation —
Vietnam, Algeria, Palestine — struggles that ignited youth around the world.
Today, all nationalist violence lacks universality. Above all, we were able to
refer to a powerful dialectic of war and revolution among people disposed to
political action. That is what the present was: the point of condensation of the
present-making power of war and the emancipatory power of revolution.
Lenin, and then Mao, were the great names for that condensation.
“Insurrection is an art.” “Power is at the end of a rifle.” “Either war will
provoke revolution, or revolution will prevent war.” Major maxims from
almost a century of the history of political emancipation.
In addition to the usual references, we should also mention something that
lies at the margins of this vast body of thought, the theory and practice of
guerilla war: Che Guevara and Fidel Castro. We should mention it if only to
distinguish ourselves from the bastards who today mount a hue and cry
demanding some “humanitarian” expedition against the Cuban regime, in the
hope that in this way the island will at last return to what it was before the
guerillas of the Sierra Maestra took power, that it will become once more
what the bastards passionately desire that it become: the brothel of the United
States.
Whatever the case, from 1917 to 1976 (the death of Mao), war and
revolution were the transcendental of the present.
Of this present that ties the localized force of war to the distant becoming
of emancipation nothing remains — nothing remains that, for the moment, can
be activated. In any case, the postwar has certainly been over since the very
beginning of the 1990s.
And yet this ending does not by itself constitute, in any way, a present.
No revolution, no political invention, no creation of anything has taken place.
Everywhere instead there was collapse, restoration, imitation, incorporation.
“Democracy” arrived like the — generally unpopular — spiritual supplement of
the dealers and the predatory politicians, those who were selling and those
who were selling out.
It was undoubtedly the Gulf War that initiated the era of the wars of the postpostwar.
And yet this beginning is not the present of the era it convenes. No
THE AMERICAN WAR AGAINST IRAQ 225
present brought an end to the postwar, which died saturated, puffed up,
powerless.
Here we are in a world situated in the interval, suspended between an
old, inactive dialectical figure (war and/or revolution) and a false present —
commercial and military — that looks to protect its future by doing without
the present, and by erasing from the past everything that, in the past, was in
the present.
War and Peace
If the American war is incapable of signifying a present, it’s because the very
category of “war” has become considerably obscured. There was, there is,
there will be war. George W. Bush characterized the whole period that began
after the mass crimes of September 11th as the period of the “war against
terrorism.” But what kind of war is this?
First of all, and this is very important, these wars are never declared.
Ancient capitals (Baghdad, Kabul, Belgrade…) are heavily bombed without
any indication to anyone that war has been declared.
In the old days people considered those who behaved in such a way to be
criminals. In the first movement of a poem by Victor Hugo entitled “Ratbert,”
(“Les conseillers probes et libres,” “The Principled and Impartial Advisers” —
a very contemporary title at that), there is a whole outpouring of sycophantic
declarations addressed by various courtiers to the powerful men of the
moment. You would think you were listening to an assembly made up of
Glucksmann, Kouchner, Goupil, and Bruckner, assigned the task of providing
noble reasons, sublime moral drapery, and intensely democratic motivations
for the various criminal acts of American power. One of the courtiers, Aranus
the priest, is particularly mawkish. This is because he is “a great and very wise
casuist,” “pious, charitable, alms-giving,” because he “invokes the divine spirit, then
addresses questions”—in short, a perfect New Philosopher. And among the ethical
legitimizations he comes up with to cover up Ratbert’s imperial violence I
read this one:
“Ottomans being outside of common law,
We can attack them without declaring war.”
Translation: “Muslims aren’t democrats,” or “totalitarians are not humanists.”
The conclusion is obvious.
From the moment we begin to live indistinctly in the war of democracies
against Islamic terrorism, which is to say, quite simply, the war of Good
(democratic) against Evil (dictatorial), operations of war — expeditions,
bombings — don’t need to be any more solemnly announced than do police
226 CONTEMPORARY FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE STUDIES
raids on petty criminals. By the same token, assassinating heads of state, their
wives, children, and grandchildren, or putting a price on their heads like in
a western, no longer surprises anyone. Thus, little by little the continuity of
war comes to be established, the declaration of which, in times past, showed
that, on the contrary, war was the present of a discontinuity. Already, this
continuity renders war and peace indistinguishable.
This means that the question of the protagonists of the state of war is
more and more obscure. “Terrorists,” “rogue states,” “dictatorships,”
“Islamists”: just what are these ideological entities? Who identifies them, who
proclaims them?
Traditionally, there were two kinds of war: on the one hand, symmetrical
war, between comparable imperial powers, like the two world wars of the
twentieth century, or like the cold war between the USA and the USSR; on
the other hand, non-symmetrical or dissymmetrical wars between an imperial
power and popular forces theoretically much weaker in terms of military
power — either wars of colonial conquest (the conquest of Algeria, the Rif
war, or the extermination of the Indians in North America), or wars of
national liberation (Vietnam, Algeria, and so forth).
Today, we can talk about dissymmetrical wars, but without the political
identity of the dissymmetry being really conceivable. The proof for this lies
in the fact that invasion and occupation operations (Afghanistan, Kosovo, Iraq,
and so on) are explicitly presented as liberations — and this despite the fact
that the local populations don’t see things in that way at all. In fact, now the
concept of war only designates the use of violence, disposed in variable
dissymmetries. The only invariable trait is dissymmetry: only the weak are
targeted, and as soon as the shadow of power can be seen (North Korea’s
atomic bomb, the Russia of brutal extortions in Chechnya, the heavy hand of
the Chinese in Tibet), war — war which might risk actually becoming war, and
not the peace of the police, or peace/war (la peguerre apre`s l’apre`s-guerre?)1 —
is not on the agenda.
In fact, if the American wars don’t constitute any kind of present, it’s
because, being politically unconnected to any dialectic, whether interimperialist,
whether according to the war/revolution schema, they are not really
distinguishable from the continuity of “peace.” And by “peace” is meant
American, or “western,” peace, democratic peace/war, whose entire content
is the comfort of the above-mentioned “democrats” against the barbarian
aggressiveness of the poor.
Pacifism 
