巴迪厄哲学自传（二）
=============================
发布时间：2009-09-27 12:17
 The fifth story is a marxist one.
Naturally, my family tradition was to the left. My father had
bequeathed to me two images: the image of the anti-nazi resistant
during the war, and then the image of the socialist militant in power,
because he was mayor of a big French town, Toulouse, for thirteen
years. My story is the story of a rupture with this sort of official left.
There are two periods in the history of my rupture with the official
left. The last, well known, is May 68 and its continuation. The other,
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 4 of 10
left. The last, well known, is May 68 and its continuation. The other,
less known, more secret and so even more active. In 1960 there was
a general strike in Belgium. I will not give the details. I was sent to
cover this strike as a journalist - I was often a journalist, I have
written, it seems to me, hundreds of articles, maybe thousands. I
met mine workers on strike. They have reorganized the entire social
life of the country, by constructing a sort of new popular legitimacy.
They have even edited a new money. I assisted at their assemblies, I
spoke with them. And I was from then on convinced, up till this day
I am speaking to you, that philosophy is on that side. “On that side”
is not a social determination. It means: on the side of what is
spoken orpronounced there, on the side of this obscure part of
common humanity. On the side of equality.
The abstract maxim of philosophy is necessarily absolute equality.
After my experience of mine workers strike in Belgium, I have give a
philosophical order to myself : “transform the notion of truth in such
a way that it obeys the equalitarian maxim, this is why I gave the
truth three attributes:
1) It depends on an irruption, and not on a structure. Any truth is
new, this will be the doctrine of the event.
2) All truth is universal, in a radical sense, the anonymous
equalitarian for-all, the pure for-all, constitutes it in its being, this
will be its genericity.
3) A truth constitutes its subject, and not the inverse, this will be its
militant dimension.
All that, in a still total obscurity, is at work when I meet in 1960 the
Belgium Mine Workers.
The story number six is a very moral story.
After 68, during what we can call the red years, when we invented
new things, when we created bonds with peoples that we did not
know, when we were in the conviction that an entirely other world
than that of our academic destiny awaited us, we entered into a
political enterprise with a good many people, - and some of them,
me included, continue this new political enterprise.
But what really struck me, the experience I wish to speak of here, is
the experience of those who, starting with the middle of the 1970s,
renounced this enterprise. Not only did they renounce this enterprise,
but they entered into a systematic renegation that, starting with the
new philosophers, from the end of the 1970s, little by little establish
themselves, spread and dominate. And this is planted in philosophy
like an arrow. It is a question in itself: How is it possible that one
can cease being the subject of a truth? How is it possible that one
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 5 of 10
can cease being the subject of a truth? How is it possible that one
return to the routine of the world This question nourishes my
conviction that what is constitutive of philosophy is to stay not only
within the vividness of the event, but within its becoming, that is,
within the treatment of its consequences. Never to return to
structural passivity : That is properly constitutive of philosophy as
thought. It is what I simply called fidelity. And fidelity forms a knot,
it is a concept that brings together the subject, the event and truth.
It is what traverses the subject with regard to an event capable of
constituting a truth.
Here again I think of Plato. At the end of Book IX of the Republic,
Socrates responds to the objection that the ideal city which he had
traced the plan of would probably never exist. This is a massive
objection that the young people make: “All that is magnificent, but
we don’t see it coming!”. Socrates responds more or less like this:
that this city exists or may one day exist is of no importance,
because it is only its laws that must dictate our conduct. That is the
principle of consequence. And it is not a question that is inferred
from a problem of existence or inexistence. It’s our philosophical duty
: to continue.
It’s my story seven which is an erotic story. This is what is expended
by all biographers. Will you be disappointed? I will stay within the
discreet erotic genre. A “soft” story.
Just like everyone, in the 50s and 60s, we were tormented by
sexuality. This torment is certainly stil very perceptible in my first
novels, Almagestes, in 1964 and then Portulans in 1967. But
literature is a filter here. In the end, this trouble is foreign to
philosophy strictly speaking., in conformity to its great classical
tradition. I would say that I learned little by little why. It is certain
that sexual situations are fascinating, and it is also certain that the
formalism of these situations, the erotic formalism is extraordinarily
poor. And all its force depends on a repetitive injunction, with
variations of little amplitude. I would say then that little by little in
life a relation of charmed connivance is established with this
formalism. Finally neither transgressive fascination, nor the
repression of the superego are really at their place in this affair. All
that is delicious, and, after all, without great consequence for
thought. I have come to conclude philosophically, that as acute as
this pacifying charmed connivance might be, at least for me, desire is
not a central category for philosophy, and cannot be. Or rather
desires only touches philosophy - just as well as jouissance - as
bodies are seized in love. That is why, from this long crossing
through sexual torment the final result is, as I had already said for
other reasons, that love, and not desire, must instantly return into
the constitution of the concept.
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 6 of 10
The story number eight is a formal story, or a story concerning
forms.
I said, on the subject of the erotic injunction, “formalism”, and I said
it as a philosopher. Because I deeply believe that what permits a
singular truth - amorous as well as political — to touch philosophy is,
in the end, its form. In this sense, I would sustain that the only
philosophy is formalist. Perhaps in the sense of Plato when he says:
“the only veritable thought is in forms” — what is often translated by
“Idea” is better rendered by “form”. And I believe that the creation
of concepts lies in this: philosophy conceives the singularity of
theorms of truth. And there again, we have a Platonic program. Why
Platonic? Dialectics is the science of forms. And form is, in
philosophy, singularity. It is, as Socrates says in Phaedo, “the unique
form of what remains identical to itself.”
From this we have an intimate tie between philosophy and
mathematics (a tie strongly thematized by Plato himself.) If the
philosophic concepts are in the end the form of the concepts of truth,
then they must support the proof of formalization. Whatever this
proof be. All the great philosophers have submitted the concept to
an overwhelming, speculative form of formalization. I think this is
why mathematics must have remained a passion for me? I scrutinize
this precisely - in mathematics: What is thought capable of when it is
devoted to, pure form? As the literality of form? And the conclusion I
have progressively drawn is that what it is capable of, when it is
ordained as pure form, is thinking being as such, being as being.
Which gives my provoking formula according to which effective
ontology is nothing else than constituted mathematics. Which,
obviously, in the eyes of the psychoanalyst, means that my desire is
only there to sublimate the image of my mathematician father.
The final story, the story number nine, is about my masters.
Philosophy is a question of mastery, and this in a triple sense. First
because it belongs in effect to what Lacan called the discourse of the
master. Then because it supposes, in its very subjectivity, the
encounter with a master. Finally and lastly, because if we look
closely at it, philosophy always ends up by constituting a discourse
that is ordained to a principal signifier, a master signifier, such as is,
in my thought, the signifier “truth. In the three cases, philosophy is a
question of mastery; So, biographically, who were my masters?
During the decisive years of my education, I had three masters:
Sartre, Lacan and Althusser. They were not masters of the same
thing.
What Sartre taught me was simply, existentialism. But what does
existentialism mean? It means that you must have a tie between the
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 7 of 10
existentialism mean? It means that you must have a tie between the
concept on the one hand and on the other the existential agency of
choice, the agency of the vital decision. The conviction that the
philosophic concept is not worth an hour of toil if, be it by mediations
of a great complexity, it does not reverberate, clarify and ordain the
agency of choice, of the vital decision. And in this sense, the concept
must be, also and always, an affair of existence. That is what Sartre
taught me.
Lacan taught me the connection, the necessary link between a
theory of subjects and a theory of forms. He taught me how and why
the very thinking of subjects, which had so often been opposed to
the theory of forms, was in reality intelligible only within the
framework of this theory. He taught me that the subject is a
question that is not at all of a psychological character, but is an
axiomatic and formal question. More than any other question!
Althusser taught me two things: that there was no object proper to
philosophy — this is one of his great theses —, but that there were
orientations of thought, lines of separation. And, as Kant had already
said, a sort of perpetual fight, a fight that was constantly begun
again, in new conditions. He taught me consequently the sense of
delimitations, of what he called the demarcation. In particular the
conviction that philosophy is not the vague discourse of totality, or
the general interpretation of what there is. That philosophy must be
delimited, that it must be separated from what is not philosophy.
Politics and philosophy are two distinct things, art and philosophy are
two distinct things, science and philosophy are two distinct things.
Finally, I was able then to keep all my masters. I kept Sartre despite
the disregard he was object of for a long time. I kept Lacan despite
what must really be called the terrible character of his disciples. And
I kept Althusser despite the substantial political divergences that
opposed me to him starting with May 68. Crossing through the
possibility of oblivion, the dissemination of disciples and the political
conflict, I succeeded in conserving my fidelity to three disparate
masters.
And I maintain today that in philosophy masters are necessary; I
maintain a constitutive hostility to the tendency towards democratic
professionalization of philosophy and to the imperative that is
rampant today and humiliates youth: “Be little, and work as a team.”
I would also say that the masters, must be combined and
surmounted, but finally, it is always disastrous to deny them.
It’s the end, now. And when I am at my wits’ end, my trick is to
pass the stick on to the poet. I have chosen the poet of my
adolescence. Saint John Perse. With him, I can speak of another
dimension of life, the companions, the companions of existence.
the symptom  Philosophy as Biography Alain Badiou 9/12/08 12:32 PM
http://www.lacan.com/symptom/?p=62 Page 8 of 10
This entry was written by the symptom, posted on June 19, 2008 at 10:40 pm,
filed under Jacques-Alain Miller. Bookmark the permalink. Follow any comments
here with the RSS feed for this post. Post a comment or leave a trackback:
Trackback URL. Edit
 Political Texts
The University in the New Reich
Martin Heidegger
Extimity
Jacques-Alain Miller 
dimension of life, the companions, the companions of existence.
The companions of the poet are different from the companions of the
philosopher. The companions of the philosopher are the different
societies within which the question of a truth is at least posed. The
companions of the poet are often the companions of his solitude,
which is why Saint John Perse enumerates them as companions in
exile, at the moment when he himself must go into exile. And aftet
the enumeration of his companions, he returns to his solitude, and
he says that:
Stranger, on all the beaches of this world, with neither audience nor
witness, press to the ear of the West a seashell without memory:
Precarious host on the outskirts of our cities, you will not cross the
sill of Lloyds, where your word is not honored and your gold has no
title…
‘I shall inhabit my name’ was his response to the questionnaires of
the port;
And on the tables of exchange, you have nothing but trouble to
produce,
Just as these great moneys in iron exhumed by lightning.
“I shall inhabit my name”: this is precisely what philosophy tries to
render possible for each and every one. Or rather, philosophy
searches for the formal conditions, the possibility for each and every
one to inhabit his name, to be simply there, and recognized by all as
the one who inhabits his name, who, by right of this, as inhabiting
his name, is the equal of anyone else.
That is why we mobilize so many resources. That is also what our
monotonous biography can be used for: to constantly begin again the
search for the conditions by which the proper name of each one can
be inhabited.
Powered by Bookmarkify 
