巴迪厄：美国权力的实质
=============================
发布时间：2009-09-27 00:19
 The Nature of American Power
American power, which derived, to a certain extent, from the long conflict
with the USSR — a conflict that normalized the use of this power — strikes me
as having three characteristics.
First of all, its installation, dating from way back (in fact, from Reagan’s
“star wars”), and existing since then continuously, in an absolute representation
of military superiority. Even though the apparent hegemony is total and
uncontested, the effort devoted to building up military equipment has never
slowed down. The war budget of the United States is higher than that of all
the other “big” powers put together. Everything happens as though the
successive governments — and in this sense Bush is simply managing an
inheritance — work at obtaining a qualitative superiority, a state of things such
that it would be impossible for anyone to even compare itself to American
power, or even to hope to one day arrive at such a comparison. In this there
is an impressive autonomy of the military factor, constituted around the
notion of an irreversible disproportion between the United States and the rest
of the world.
Secondly, we must consider the self-centering of the United States, the
total filtering of everything that concerns the rest of the world through the
very particular system of its interests. For Americans, the world has no
objective existence. It is only a stage for their interests, a disparate assortment
of situations examined in function of the threats or resources that these
situations constitute for American comfort (what’s been called, for some time,
either the “American way of life,”2 or the “American dream,”3 which the whole
world, in the end, is asked to consider the supreme goal of that world, and
which one must work to perpetuate). The extraordinary ignorance exhibited
by the majority of Americans about the most elementary givens of the lives
of other people, an ignorance of which we could give an infinity of astounding
examples, is really only a consequence of the fact that America is, for
Americans, the finality of the world. A consequence that an Aristotelian could
sustain: if the USA is the supreme unmoved mover of the activity of the rest
of the world, then turning towards the United States alone fulfills thought.
This is exactly what the European (mostly French) hired hit men proclaim:
that America is the “great democracy,” the defender of our liberties, or, as
THE AMERICAN WAR AGAINST IRAQ 229
Americans — all of them, even certified progressives — have always said, it is
the model of what “a free country”* can be.
Finally, we must consider the nature of American interventionism. It is
not, in fact, of a classically imperial kind. An empire takes care of the regions
it occupies, regulates the problems of territorial administration, examines
questions regarding the diversity of customs, creates infrastructures, determines
with exactitude the relations with the metropole, and so forth. Nothing
of the sort occurs in American interventions, which can accommodate
horrible, prolonged disorder (as in Palestine, Afghanistan, Africa, tomorrow
in Iraq), providing that whatever it was that motivated the bombs and the
invasion be, as they say, “secured.”
Is this the same thing as saying that the United States is only a secondary,
or in any case not a central, piece of a systematic transnational apparatus like
the one Negri calls “Empire”? I find no basis whatsoever for that construction,
one that is, as usual, exclusively destined to elicit, through a reversal of that
systematic power, the radiant promise of the constitutionalized “multitude.”
As we know, for Negri the follower of Spinoza, there is only one historic
substance, such that the capitalist Empire is at the same time the stage for an
unprecedented communist deployment. This certainly has the advantage of
allowing people to believe that the worse everything gets, the better things are
going, or to mistakenly take the uselessly convoked demonstrations held in the
midst of the powerful for the “creation” and the “multiform invention” of new
petit-bourgeois proletarians.
In fact, the United States is an imperialist power without an empire, a
hegemony without territoriality. I propose the term “zoning” [zonage] to
convey its relation to the world: every place in the world can be considered
by the American government as a zone of vital interest, or as a zone of total
disinterest, according to fluctuations in the consideration of its “democratic”
comfort. You could die by the thousands without America raising an eyebrow
(thus, for years, AIDS in Africa), or, on the other hand, have to endure the
build-up of a colossal army in the middle of the desert (Iraq today). Zonage
means that American military intervention resembles a raid much more than
a colonial-type intervention. It’s about vast incursions, particularly brutal in
nature, that are as brief as possible. Kill people in large numbers, beat them
into a stupor, smash them until their last gasp, then return home to enjoy the
comfort you’ve so skillfully defended in a provisionally “strategic” zone: this
is how the USA thinks about its power, and about how to use it.
The time will certainly come for us to conceptualize this assertion: the
metaphysics of American power is a metaphysics of limitlessness. The great
imperial theories of the nineteenth century were always theories of dividing,
dividing up the world, creating boundaries. For the USA, there are no limits.
Nixon’s advisers, as Noam Chomsky points out, were already proclaiming this
under the name of “the politics of the madman.” The USA must impose upon the
230 CONTEMPORARY FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE STUDIES
rest of the world the belief that it — the United States — is capable of anything,
and especially of what is neither rational nor foreseeable. The excessive quality
of the interventions aims at getting the adversary to realize that the American
retaliation can be totally unrelated to what was initially at stake. The adversary
will deem it preferable to concede management of the disputed zone, for a
time, to the “mad” power. The invasion of Iraq, currently under preparation,
is a figure of that madness. It shows that, for American governments, there
are neither countries, nor States, nor peoples. There are only zones, where
one is justified in destroying everything if there is, in those zones, the slightest
question of the idea — an empty one, besides — of American comfort.
University 
