巴迪厄：世纪七变奏
=============================
发布时间：2009-09-24 00:07
 Seven Variations on the Century1
Alain Badiou
Today we are forced to endure the dominance of an artificial individualism. In
France, in 1995, millions of people demonstrated, rallied by the one slogan: ‘together!’
— what Paul Celan, in his poem Anabasis, named the ‘tent-word’. In Seattle and
Prague, the rights of collectivities have been declared against the transnational
institutions of global finance. In response to all of this, propaganda offers us the ‘selfevident’
rights of the individual caught up in the competitive search for happiness
and success. Even in the literary world, the production of biographies and
autobiographies is saturating the market. Nothing is considered as worthy of interest
except what the Chinese, who adore lists, would call ‘the three relations’: the relation
to money, the relation to economic and social success, and the relation to sex. The
rest is nothing but archaic abstraction, and very likely totalitarian. What is modern
is the generalisation, as Ego-ideals, of the three relations. Behold! … not what in
fact is, but what, with a sort of vengeful obstinacy, they are attempting to impose
upon us as what must be.
At the very least, we can foster the awareness that this propaganda, far from
pertaining, as it claims to, to the nature of the things and subjects democratically
inscribed within the media, constitutes instead an act of forcing, achieved through
the extraordinarily brutal inversion of everything that the century had managed to
desire and invent. The current of thought which effectively marks the epoch that is
coming to a close — whatever its often violently opposing variants may be — maintains
that every authentic subjectivation is collective, that every vigorous intellectuality
implies the construction of a ‘we’. This is because, for this current, a subject is
necessarily measured by its historicity. In other words, it is a subject who resonates,
in its composition, with the power of an event. This is one of the forms of what I
call ‘the passion for the real’: the certainty that, issuing from an event, the subjective
will can realise unheard of possibilities within the world; that, far from being a
powerless fiction, the will intimately affects the real.
On the contrary, today’s propaganda wants to impose upon us the conviction that
willing, under the domination of a crushing reality principle whose distillate is the
economy, must prove itself extraordinarily circumspect if it is not to expose the world
to grave disasters. Violence must not be done to the nature of things. At base, the
spontaneous philosophy of modernising propaganda is Aristotelian: let the nature of
things manifest its proper ends. We must not do, but let be. Just think of the gap
parallax
ISSN 1353-4645 print/ISSN 1460-700X online  2003 Taylor  Francis Ltd
parallax http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
72 DOI: 10.1080/1353464032000065017
between this stance and the conscience of those who used to sing, beneath red flags:
‘the world is going to change from below’.
If you think that the world can and must change absolutely, that there is neither a
nature of things to be respected nor pre-formed subjects to be maintained, you
thereby admit that the individual can be sacrificed. This means that, by itself, the
individual is not endowed with any intrinsic nature that would merit us striving for
its preservation. It is with reference to this theme of the unnaturalness of the human
subject — more, of the inexistence of man, and thus the vacuity of human rights —
that today I would like to propose some variations.
First Variation: Philosophical. In varying guises, philosophers, between the
Thirties and the Sixties, worked with the idea that the real of an individual — the
constitution of an individual as a subject — is entirely modifiable. Obviously, this
constituted a sort of philosophical accompaniment to the theme of the new man.
For example, one of Sartre’s first texts, The Transcendence of the Ego, develops the
intuition of an open and constitutive consciousness, whose concrete manifestations
as ‘me’ or as ‘ego’, and therefore as an identifiable individual, are nothing but
external ephemera. The immanent being of consciousness is not grasped through
the transcendence, or the identifiable objectivity, of the Ego. Later, Sartre would
draw the rigorous ontological consequences of this intuition by posing that the being
of consciousness is nothingness, which means absolute freedom, thus rendering any
idea of a subjective nature impossible. In psychoanalysis, and singularly in the way
it was recast by Lacan, the Ego is an imaginary instance, and the subject as such
can no longer be either a nature or a being, because it is (and this is what is meant
by ‘unconscious’) ec-centric with respect to its own determination. Lacan names this
point of eccentricity ‘the Other’, so that every subject is something like an Alteration
of self. This is what Rimbaud had anticipated: ‘I is an other’. Here, it is once again
impossible to think the individual as an objective nature.
To the extent that the century has contributed innovations to the theory of the
subject, it has conceived the subject as a separation from self, as an interior
transcendence. In my own doctrine, the subject is dependent on an event and only
comes to be constituted as a capacity for truth. Since its ‘matter’ is a truth procedure,
or generic procedure, the subject cannot be naturalised in any way. Adopting Sartre’s
vocabulary, we will say that the subject has no essence (this is the meaning of the
well-known formula ‘existence precedes essence’). Adopting Lacan’s vocabulary, we
will say that a subject is only identified at the point of lack, as a void or lack-of-being.
If the subject is constituted as a lack-of-being, the question of its real remains open,
since this real is neither an essence nor a nature. It is then possible to maintain that
a subject ‘is’ not, but rather advenes, under certain determinate conditions, where
instead Lacan would simply say: ‘it is lacking’. Nietzsche’s imperative, ‘become who
you are’, finds a worthy echo here. If one is to become a subject, it is because one
isn’t one yet. The ‘who’ that you are, as subject, is nothing but the decision to
become this subject.
You can see here the emergence of a link between the thesis that a subject is of the
order, not of what is, but of what happens — of the order of the event — and the idea
parallax
73
that the individual can be sacrificed to a historical cause that exceeds it. Since the
being of the subject is the lack-of-being, it is only by dissolving itself into a project
which exceeds it that an individual can hope to attain some subjective real. Whence
the fact that the ‘we’, constructed in and by this project, is the only thing that is
truly real, the only thing that is subjectively real for the individual who supports it.
The individual, in truth, is nothing. The subject is constituted as the new man,
emerging at the point of a lack to self. The individual is thus in its very essence the
nothing that must be dissolved into a we-subject.
The affirmative reverse of this sacrificial evidence of the individual is that the ‘we’
that a truth constructs — the stakes as well as the support of which are to be found
in the new man — is itself immortal. It is immortal by virtue of the fact that it exists,
not according to a perishable nature, but according to an eternal occurrence, as
eternal as Mallarme’s dice-throw.
Second Variation: Ideological. How did the century re-organise the three great
signifiers of the French Revolution: liberty, equality, fraternity? The dominant thesis
today, under the mandatory name of democracy, is that the only thing that counts
is liberty. A liberty, moreover, so affected by the contempt the other two terms are
held in (equality is utopian and anti-natural, fraternity leads to the despotism of the
‘we’) that it becomes purely regulative or juridical: the liberty for all to do the same
things, under the same rules.
This idea of liberty was incessantly reviled during the short 20th century, the one
that goes from 1917 to 1980. It bore the name of formal liberty, and it was opposed
with real liberty — note the pertinence of the adjective. Formal liberty means this: a
liberty that is neither articulated through a global, egalitarian project, nor practised
subjectively as fraternity.
Throughout the century, equality was the strategic aim: politically, under the name
of communism; scientifically, under the name of the axiomatic; artistically, under
the imperative of the fusion of art and life; sexually, as ‘mad love’. Liberty, as the
unlimited power of the negative, was presupposed, but not thematised. As for
fraternity, it was the real itself pure and simple, the sole subjective guarantee of
the novelty of experiences, since equality remained programmatic and liberty
instrumental.
I insist: fraternity is the real manifestation of the new world, and thus of the new
man. What is experimented — in the Party, in action, in the subversive artistic group,
in the egalitarian couple — is the real violence of fraternity. And what is the content
of this fraternity, if not the acceptance that the infinite ‘we’ prevails over the finitude
of the individual? This is what is named by the word ‘comrade’, which today, for
all intents and purposes, has fallen into disuse. My comrade is one who, like myself,
is only a subject by belonging to a process of truth that authorises him or her to
say ‘we’.
This is why I hold fast to the conviction that this is not in the slightest a question of
utopia or illusion. The set-up for the emergence of the subject is, quite simply,
Badiou
74
complete. In Lacan’s terms, equality is the imaginary (since it cannot come about
as an objective figure, even though it is the ultimate reason for everything), liberty
is the symbolic (since it is the presupposed instrument, the fecund negative), and
fraternity is the real (or what is sometimes encountered, here and now).
Third Variation: Critical. The risk incurred in always articulating the constitution
of the subject onto a collective, and thus universalizable, transcendence, is that of
transferring onto the collective the natural or at least objective properties that the
proponents of laissez-faire assume to be the prerogative of the human individual. The
century hardly spared itself this deviation. The fascisms did not fail to replace the
subjective universality of the truth procedures (political invention, artistic creation,
etc.) that they detested with the definition of great collectives of reference: the nation,
the race, the West. We can call ‘Stalinism’ the substitution, pronounced on the basis
of the Soviet State’s position of power, of entities of this sort (Working Class, Party,
Socialist Camp …) for the real political processes of which Lenin had been the
foremost thinker, and which Mao in turn attempted to identify.
Let us note in passing, so as not to be in tune with the vulgar equation of nazism
and supposed communism (what in effect was the Stalinist State) under the name of
totalitarianism, that these two political set-ups remain entirely opposed to one
another, even in what concerns the genesis of their entities of reference. For it is
precisely against the political processes of emancipation linked to the word
‘proletarian’ — processes they correctly perceive to be unbound, unassignable,
cosmopolitan, and anti-State — that, in a perfectly explicit manner, the various
fascisms preach submission to national and/or racial totalities of reference and to
their putative representatives. The Stalinist state is instead the reification of these
real political processes, a reification that comes from the impossibility, encountered
by Leninism, of integrating into its conceptual system the question of how the power
of the State is to be exercised. Whilst the State has always been the alpha and omega
of the fascist vision of the political — as a State based on the supposed existence of
great closed collectives — it has never been, in the history of Leninism, and later of
Maoism, anything but the obstacle posed by the brutal finitude of the operations
of power to the infinite mobility of politics.
The absolute opposition of these political doctrines within the century can be given
a more philosophical expression. Fascism’s attempt to oppose, to the infinite of
emancipation, the bloody obstacle of a predicable finitude, the denumerable
properties of a supposed substance (the Aryan, the Jew, the German …).
Communism’s experiment with the antinomy (indicated by Marx, with his customary
genius) between the finitude of the State and the infinite immanent to any truth,
including above all political truth. The mythical entities of reference accompany the
victory of fascisms, and signal the inevitable defeat of communisms.
And yet it is true that, whether they are idealised and turned from the outset into
the subjective support of a politics of conquest, or considered as nothing but the
pompous names of political stagnation, there is indeed a remarkable production of
imaginary macroscopic entities and hyperbolic names. These large entities do not
constitute the we-subject discussed above. They do not have their origin in an
parallax
75
occurrence or an event; they are inert collectives. They are seen by their devotees
as necessary conditions of subjectivation, as the objective matter that the we-subject
either reflects or enacts in practice. I propose to name these entities the passive body
of subjectivation.
Why, even in the experience of State control, should one not rest content with the
real ‘we’, the ‘we’ that envelops the ‘I’ in the effective becoming of an invention of
thought? Why is it that the determination of an acting singularity so often has had
to represent itself as the consciousness or experience of objective entities, of mythical
hypostases? Why endow action with a passive body? We shall have occasion to see
that this formidable objectivation intervenes in the problem of the naming of processes,
in the theory of names. For now, we can ask ourselves if the great macroscopic
totalities are not summoned, when they belong to communism, as names (proletarian
politics, bourgeois art, socialist camp, imperialist camp, State of the workers and
peasants …) whose only value is to provide the cheap universalisation of a process,
at the very moment when this process falls into sterility or is fixed in the State form.
The name is what allows a singularity to be asserted beyond itself. The century’s
treatment of names is also a prisoner of the Two, of the non-dialectical synthesis.
On the one hand, it is important to love the acting singularities alone (this is
fraternity); on the other hand, these singularities must be historicized, even during
those moments when invention is lacking — those moments when, as the French
revolutionary Saint-Just once said, ‘the revolution is frozen’. The universality of these
moments must be rendered evident by names that easily convey identifiable
objectivities.
In the end, the problem is the following: why do we need, in this century, great
(objective) collectives in order to name? Why do the political processes of
emancipation always take the name of supposedly objective social entities, such as
the proletariat, the people or the nation?
I believe it can be shown that this question is related to the tribute that the century
paid to science, and therefore that it is related to what survives of the scientism of
the 19th century in the midst of the voluntarism of the 20th. Objectivity is in fact a
crucial scientific norm. The legitimacy of adequate names for the we-subject was
sought within the more or less certain sciences, such as historical materialism. Even
nazism is a racial mythology which presents itself as scientific. To attain its ends of
submission and extermination, it thought it could rely on the racialist anthropological
jargon that had accompanied the imperial expansion of Europe ever since the 18th
century. That this jargon was a tissue of laboured and criminal fictions is as plain
as day. The science of race is purely imaginary. It will be noted that an imaginary
Marxist science also existed, even if it did not itself determine the revolutionary
subjectivities of the century. This Marxism, devoid of a correlate in the real, claimed
to be a scientifically legitimate fraternity pure and simple, and here lay its strength.
Fourth Variation: Temporal. The century proposed its own vision of historical
time. It had a very broad genealogical vision of political confrontations, following
Marx who wrote that the entire history of men was one of class struggle. Academic
historians, on their part, worked on long durations, holding the scale of a human
Badiou
76
life to be a negligible quantity with respect to the flux of significations. It is clear
that this history was by no means a ‘humanist’ one.
It is very striking to see that today we are practically bereft of any thinking of time.
For just about everyone, the day after tomorrow is abstract and the day before
yesterday is incomprehensible. We have entered an atemporal, instantaneous period;
this shows the extent to which, far from being the shared experience of individuals,
time is a construction, and even, we could argue, a political construction. For a
moment, let us reconsider, as an example, the five-year plans which structured the
industrial development of the Stalinist USSR. If the plan could come to be extolled
even in works of art, such as Eisenstein’s film The General Line, it is because, over and
above its economic significance (a dubious one, as we know), planning designates
the determination to submit growth to the political will of men. The five years of
the plan are much more than a mere number, they are a temporal material in which,
day after day, the collective will comes to inscribe itself. This is clearly an allegory,
in and by time, of the power of the ‘we’. The entire century, in varying ways, saw
itself as a constructivist century — a vision that implies the staging of a voluntary
construction of time.
There was once the immemorial time of the peasantry, an immobile or cyclic time,
a time of labour and of sacrifice, barely offset by the rhythm of the seasons. Today,
we undergo the marriage of frenzy and total rest. On the one hand, propaganda
tells us that everything changes by the minute, that we have no time, that we must
modernise at top speed, that we’re going to ‘miss the train’ (the train of the Internet
and the new economy, the train of the cellular phone for everyone, the train of
countless stockbrokers, the train of stock-options, the train of pension funds — I could
go on …). On the other hand, this racket cannot conceal a kind of passive immobility
or indifference, the stubborn perpetuation of what there is. This time is thus one
upon which the will, be it collective or individual, has no hold. It is an inaccessible
mixture of agitation and sterility, the paradox of a stagnant febrility.
Even if — as often happens in the heat of invention — it was handled with clumsiness
and dogmatism, the century’s powerful idea of time must continue to inspire us, at
the very least against the modernising temporality that annuls any subjectivation
whatsoever. The idea is that if we wish to attain to the real of time we must construct
it, and that in the end this construction depends entirely on the care that we take in
becoming agents of the procedures of truth. Let us praise the century for having
borne the epic proposal of an integral construction of time.
Fifth Variation: Formal. What were the century’s dominant forms of collective
materiality? One can propose, I believe, that this century was the century of the
demonstration. What is a demonstration? It is the name of a collective body that
uses public space (the street, the square) to display its power. The demonstration is
the collective subject, the we-subject, endowed with a body. A demonstration is a
visible fraternity. The assembling of bodies into a single moving material form has
the function of saying: ‘We are here, and they (the powerful, the others, those who
are not part of the ‘‘we’’) should be afraid and take our existence into consideration.’
parallax
77
Throughout the century, the demonstration can only be understood against the
subjective horizon of a ‘we’ that could change everything. It legitimates, within the
sphere of the visible, the line from the Internationale: ‘We are nothing, let us be
everything’. The demonstration sketches out the totality aspired to by a collection
of nothings, a collection of isolated individuals.
The century was the century of demonstrations, and for a long time these
demonstrations were haunted by the figure of insurrection that is politics. Insurrection
is the final celebration of the body that the ‘we’ bestows upon itself, the final action
of fraternity. Yes, the century’s conception of the feast, being subject to the paradigm
of demonstration and insurrection, required that this feast must always come to
brutally interrupt the ordinary regime of things. Today, the feast — harmless and
consensual — is typically what diverts us away from every political concern. We see
government experts with furrowed brows report that the people want strong signs
of festivity. We see serious newspapers compare the celebrations that accompanied
France’s victory at the World Cup to the demonstrations that followed the liberation
of Paris in 1945. Why not compare it to the taking of the Bastille, or the Long
March? Today, the feast names something like a counter-demonstration.
The philosopher must here recall that ‘manifestation’ is a key Hegelian word, a word
belonging to dialectics which designates the ‘coming out of itself ’ of any reality
whatsoever. One of Hegel’s fundamental theses is that it is the essence of being to
manifest itself. The essence of essence is appearance. On this point the century,
otherwise so profoundly anti-dialectical, was very dialectical indeed. For any
fraternity, and so for a we-subject in the process of being constituted, to demonstrate
is to manifest oneself. The being of the ‘we’ is displayed, but also exhausted, in the
demonstration. There is a great dialectic confidence in this form of manifestation.
This is because the ‘we’ is, in the end, nothing but the set of its demonstrations. In
this sense, the real of the ‘we’, which is the real itself, is accessible to each and every
one in and by the demonstration. To the question: ‘what is there that is real?’, the
century responds: demonstrating. That which does not demonstrate is not.
Sixth Variation: Critical (once again). One of the great weaknesses of the
century’s thought, or at least one of its zones of uncertainty, is that it entertained a
conception of legitimacy based on representation. In politics, for example, it largely
supported and practised one of Lenin’s later maxims, a maxim presented by its
author as the ABC of Marxism, but which nevertheless remains doubtful: ‘The masses
are divided into classes, the classes are represented by parties, and the parties are
directed by leaders. Parties and leaders draw their legitimacy from an operation of
representation’.
If this conception of legitimacy is tested by the passion of the real it encounters the
following obstacle: the real is not represented, it is presented. In its different inventions
(the revolutionary political party, the manifesto of an artistic school, the integral
didactics of a science, etc.) the century never ceased to come up against the noncorrespondence
between the real and the represented. The real may be encountered,
manifested, or constructed, but it is not represented. Here lies the stumbling block:
Badiou
78
if all legitimacy is representative, legitimacy is but a fiction with respect to the real
that it lays claim to.
A demonstration or an insurrection, and, more broadly, a political sequence, or even
an artistic creation seized in the violence of its gesture, are in no way representable.
Fraternity is not representable. As I have already suggested, the unjustified
summoning of large, inert, macroscopic, and therefore supposedly ‘objective’ sets
(class-in-itself, race, nation…), interferes with subjectivation by means of its presumed
representative legitimacy. This is because only inertia can be represented. We thus
pass from the real model of the event and the demonstration to the ideal model
of science.
Representation and fictional legitimation on the basis of inert totalities come to fill
in the gaps of what is really presented, which is always discontinuous. Philosophically,
the ground of the problem is that the real is discontinuous. As Lacan says, by way
of an image: ‘what exists are grains of the real’. In my own vocabulary: there are
only multiple procedures of truth, multiple creative sequences, and nothing to arrange
a continuity between them. Fraternity itself is a discontinuous passion. Only moments
of fraternity truly exist. The protocols of representative legitimation attempt to render
continuous what is not, to give disparate sequences a unique name, such as the great
proletarian leader or the great founder of artistic modernity, names that in fact are
taken from fictional objectivities. Without doubt, the epic tale that the century
revelled in has its dark side. It also demands false heroes.
Seventh Variation: Anti-dialectical. I have insisted elsewhere on the singularity
of the theory of the Two, which motivates the intellectual life of the century in all
of its domains. This is an anti-dialectical Two, without synthesis. Now, in every
demonstration of fraternity there is an essential Two: that of the ‘we’ and of the
what-is-not-us. The century forces the confrontation between two manners of
conceiving the what-is-not-us. Either we see the what-is-not-us as a polymorphous
formlessness, a disordered reality; or else we see it as another ‘we’, an external, and
therefore antagonistic, subject. The conflict between these two conceptions is
fundamental; it sets out the dialectics of the anti-dialectical. If in effect the ‘we’ relates
externally to the formless, its task is that of formalising it. Fraternity becomes the
subjective moment of the in-formation of its formless exterior. According to this
model of antagonism, one will say things like: ‘the apathetic must be rallied to the
Party’; ‘the left must unite with the centre to isolate the right’; ‘the artistic avantgarde
must find forms of address that everyone can perceive’. This shows that the
century sees itself as a formalist century, in the sense that any we-subject is a
production of forms. In the end, this means that access to the real is made through
form, as was argued by the Lenin of What is to be done? (the party is the form of the
political real), the Russian formalists after the Revolution, and the mathematicians
of the Bourbaki school, or, as we have shown elsewhere, Brecht and Pirandello. If,
on the contrary, the what-is-not-us is necessarily always already formalised as antagonistic
subjectivity, the first task of any fraternity is combat, the object of which is the
destruction of the other. One will then say that ‘whoever is not with the Party is
against it’; that ‘the left must terrorise the centre to defeat the right’; or, that ‘an
parallax
79
artistic avant-garde must seek out dissidence and isolation, so as not to be alienated
within the society of the spectacle’.
At the heart of the century, for reasons that pertain to the anti-dialectics of any
primordial duality, the properly dialectical contradiction between formalisation and
destruction plays itself out. It is this contradiction that Mao gave shape to, in an
altogether innovative text — On the Just Resolution of Contradictions at the Heart of the
People — by distinguishing the antagonistic contradictions, which are in fact without
synthesis or anti-dialectical, from the contradictions within the people, which bear
on how to treat the antagonistic contradictions, and in the end concern the choice
between formalisation and destruction. Mao’s essential directive is never to treat the
contradictions within the people in an antagonistic manner, but rather to resolve the
conflict between formalisation and destruction by means of formalisation.
This is perhaps one of the most profound lessons, but also one of the most difficult,
that the century has bequeathed to us.
Translated by Alberto Toscano 
