当代东西方都在玩着同一种快感政治
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-26 12:41
 Today’s politics is more and more the politics of jouissance, concerned with the ways of soliciting or controlling and regulating jouissance. Is the entire of opposition between the liberal/tolerant West and the fundamentalist Islam not condensed in the opposition between, on the one side, the woman’s right to free sexuality, inclusive of the freedom to display/expose oneself and provoke/disturb man, and, on the other side, the desperate male attempts to eradicate or, at least, keep under control this threat (recall the ridiculous Taliban prohibition of metal heels for women — as if, even if women are entirely covered with cloth, the clinging sound of their heels would still provoke men)? And, of course, both sides ideologically/morally mystify their position: for the liberal West, the right to provocatively expose oneself to male desire is legitimized as the right to freely dispose of one’s body and to enjoy it as one wants, while for Islam, the control of feminine sexuality is, of course, legitimized as the defense of woman’s dignity against the threat of being reduced to an object of male sexual exploitation. So while, when the French State prohibited women to wear veils in the school, one can claim that, in this way, they were enabled to dispose of their body, one can also point out how the true traumatic point for the critics of Muslim ”fundamentalism” was that there were women who did not participate in the game of making their bodies disposable for sexual seduction, for the social circulation/exchange involved in it. In one way or another, all other issues relate to this one: gay marriage and their right to adopt children, divorce, abortion… What the two opposite attitudes share is the extreme disciplinary approach, which is in each case differently directed: ”fundamentalists” regulate in detail the feminine self-presentation to prevent sexual provocation; PC feminist liberals impose a no less severe regulation of behavior aimed at containing different forms of harassment.
In some ”radical” circles in the US, a proposal to ”rethink” the rights of necrophiliacs (those who desire to have sex with dead bodies) recently started to circulate — why should they be deprived of it? So the idea was formulated that, in the same way people sign permission for their organs to be use for medical purposes in the case of their sudden death, one should also allow them to sign the permission for their bodies to be given to necrophiliacs to play with them… Is this proposal not the perfect exemplification of how the PC stance realizes Kierkegaard’s old insight into how the only good neighbor is a dead neighbor? A dead neighbor — a corpse — is the ideal sexual partner of a ”tolerant” subject trying to avoid any harassment: by definition, a corpse cannot be harassed; at the same time, a dead body DOES NOT ENJOY, so the disturbing threat of the excess-enjoyment to the subject playing with the corpse is also eliminated...
However, one should add a qualification here. What we have today is not so much the POLITICS of jouissance but, more precisely, the REGULATION (administration) of jouissance which is stricto sensu post-political. Jouissance is in itself limitless, the obscure excess of the unnameable, and the task is to regulate this excess. The clearest sign of the reign of biopolitics is the obsession with the topic of ”stress”: how to avoid stressful situations, how to ”cope” with them. ”Stress” is our name for the excessive dimension of life, for the ”too-muchness” to be kept under control. (For this reason, today, more than ever, the gap that separates psychoanalysis from therapy imposes itself in all its brutality: if one wants therapeutic improvement, one will effectively get a much faster and efficient help from a combination of behavioral-cognitivist therapies and chemical treatment (pills).
How, then, are we to draw the line of distinction between the two excesses: the excess of the Fascist spectacle, of its passion with regard to the ”normal” bourgeois life, or, today, the excess that pertains to ”normal” capitalist reproduction itself, its constant self-revolutionizing; and the excess of Life itself? This duality reflects itself in the ambiguous status of the ”undead”: undeadness is simultaneously the name for the excess of drive AND the name for the vampyric pseudo-excess covering up the fact that ”we are not really alive.” Perhaps, the way to distinguish the constitutive ontological excess from the obscene excess-supplement is, again, by means of the logic of non-all, i.e., with regard to its relationship to the presupposed ”normality”: the obscene excess is the excess of exception which sustains ”normality,” while the radical ontological excess is a ”pure” excess, excess to nothing, the paradox of an excess ”as such,” of something which is in itself excessive, with no presupposed normality.
The superego imperative to enjoy thus functions as the reversal of Kant’s Du kannst, denn du sollst! (You can, because you must!) — it relies on a ”You must because you can!”. That is to say, the superego aspect of today’s ”non-repressive” hedonism (the constant provocation we are exposed to, enjoining us to go to the end and explore all modes of jouissance) resides in the way permitted jouissance necessarily turns into obligatory jouissance. However, the question here is: does the capitalist injunction to enjoy effectively aim at soliciting jouissance in its excessive character, or are we ultimately rather dealing with a kind of universalized pleasure-principle, with a life dedicated to pleasures? In other words, are the injunctions to have a good time, to acquire self-realization and self-fulfilment, etc., not precisely injunctions to AVOID the excessive jouissance, to find a kind of homeostatic balance? Are Dalai-Lama’s advices not advices how to maintain a balanced ”proper measure” and avoid the disturbing extremes? The situation is here more complex: the problem is that, although the immediate and explicit injunction calls for the rule of pleasure-principle that would maintain homeostasis, the effective functioning of the injunction explodes these constraints into a striving towards excessive enjoyment（齐泽克《我们仍生活在一个世界里么？》）. 
