德勒兹《斯宾诺莎：实践哲学》：斯宾诺莎与我们
=============================
发布时间：2010-01-17 11:03
 Writers, poets, musicians, filmmakers-painters too, even chance readers-may find that they are Spinozists; indeed, such a thing is more likely for them than for professional philosophers.
It is a matter ofone's practical conception ofthe ”plan.” It is not that one may be a Spinozist without knowing it. Rather, there is a strange privilege that Spinoza enjoys, something that seems to have been accomplished by him and no one else. He is a philosopher who commands an extraordinary conceptual apparatus,
one that is highly developed, systematic, and scholarly; and yet he is the quintessential object of an immediate, unprepared
encounter, such that a nonphilosopher, or even someone without any formal education, can receive a sudden illumination from him, a ”flash.” Then it is as if one discovers that one is a Spinozist; one arrives in the niiddle of Spinoza, one is sucked up, drawn into the system' or the composition. When Nietzsche writes, ”I am really amazed, really delighted ... I hardly knew Spinoza: what brought me to him now was the guidance of instinct,”
4 he is not speaking only as a philosopher. A historian of philosophy as rigorous as Victor Delbos was struck by this dual role of Spinoza, as a very elaborate model, but also as a secret inner impulse.s There is a double reading ofSpinoza: on the one hand, a systematic reading in pursuit ofthe general idea and the unity of the parts, but on the other hand and at the same time, the affective reading. without an idea ofthe whole, where one is carried along or set down, put in motion or at rest, shaken or calmed according to the velocity of this or that part. Who is a Spinozist? Sometimes, certainly, the individual who works ”on” Spinoza, on Spinoza's concepts, provided this is done wienough gratitude and admiration. But also the individual who, without being a philosopher, receives from Spinoza an affect, a set of affects, a kinetic determination, an impulse, and makes Spinoza an encounter, a passion. What is unique about Spinoza is that he, the most philosophic of philosophers (unlike Socrates himself, Spinoza requires only philosophy ... ), teaches the philosopher
how to become a nonphilosopher. And it is in Part Vnot
at all the most difficult, but the quickest, having an infinite velocity-that the two are brought together, the philosopher and the nonphilosopher, as one and the same being. Hence what an extraordinary composition this Part V has; how extraordinary
is the way in which the meeting of concept and affect occurs
there, and the way in which this meeting is prepared, made necessary by the celestial and subterranean movements that together
compose the preceding parts.
Many commentators have loved Spinoza sufficiently to invoke a Wind when speaking of him. And in fact no other comparison is adequate. But should we think ofthe great calm wind the philosopher
Delbos speaks of? Or should we think ofthe whirlwind, the witch's wind spoken ofby ”the man from Kiev,” a nonphilosopher
par excellence, a poorJew who bought the Ethics for a kopek
and did not understand how everything fit together?6 Both, since the Ethics includes both the continuous set of propositions,
demonstrations, and corollaries, as a grand movement of concepts, and the discontinuous sequence of scholia, as a launching of affects and impulses, a series of whirlwinds. Part V is the extreme extensive unity, but this is because it is also the most concentrated intensive peak: there is no longer any difference between the concept and life. But in the preceding
parts there was already the composition or interweaving of the two components-what Romain Rolland called ”the white sun of substance” and ”the fiery words of Spinoza.” 
