德勒兹：国际关系、世界贸易体系、战争机器
=============================
发布时间：2010-01-13 00:19
 Samir Amin is totally cor0
436 □
7000 B.C.: APPARATUS OF CAPTURE
rect in saying that there can be no economic theory of international relations,
even economic ones, because they sit astride heterogeneous formations.
20 The point of departure for ecumenical organization is not a State,
even an imperial one; the imperial State is only one part of it, and it constitutes
a part of it in its own mode, according to its own order, which consists
in capturing everything it can. It does not proceed by progressive
homoge-nization, or by totalization, but by the taking on of consistency or
the consolidation of the diverse as such. For example, monotheistic
religion is distinguished from territorial worship by its pretension to
universality. But this pretension is not homogenizing, it makes itself felt
only by spreading everywhere; this was the case with Christianity, which
became imperial and urban, but not without giving rise to bands, deserts,
war machines of its own.21 Similarly, there is no artistic movement that
does not have its towns and empires, but also its nomads, bands, and
primitives.
It might be objected that, at least in the case of capitalism, international
economic relations, and at the limit all international relations, tend toward
the homogenization of social formations. One could cite not only the cold
and concerted destruction of primitive societies but also the fall of the last
despotic formations, for example, the Ottoman Empire, which met capitalist
demands with too much resistance and inertia. This objection, however,
is only partially accurate. To the extent that capitalism constitutes an
axiomatic (production for the market), all States and all social formations
tend to become isomorphic in their capacity as models of realization: there
is but one centered world market, the capitalist one, in which even the
so-called socialist countries participate. Worldwide organization thus
ceases to pass ”between” heterogeneous formations since it assures the
isomorphy of those formations. But it would be wrong to confuse
isomorphy with homogeneity. For one thing, isomorphy allows, and even
incites, a great heterogeneity among States (democratic, totalitarian, and,
especially, ”socialist” States are not facades). For another thing, the
international capitalist axiomatic effectively assures the isomorphy of the
diverse formations only where the domestic market is developing and
expanding, in other words, in ”the center.” But it tolerates, in fact it
requires, a certain peripheral polymorphy, to the extent that it is not saturated,
to the extent that it actively repels its own limits;22 this explains the
existence, at the periphery, of heteromorphic social formations, which certainly
do not constitute vestiges or transitional forms since they realize an
ultramodern capitalist production (oil, mines, plantations, industrial
equipment, steel, chemistry), but which are nonetheless precapitalist, or
extracapitalist, owing to other aspects of their production and to the forced
inadequacy of their domestic market in relation to the world market.23
When international organization becomes the capitalist axiomatic, it con0
7000 tinues to imply a heterogeneity of social formations, it gives rise to and
organizes its ”Third World.”
There is not only an external coexistence of formations but also an
intrinsic coexistence of machinic processes. Each process can also function
at a ”power” other than its own; it can be taken up by a power corresponding
to another process. The State as apparatus of capture has a power of
appropriation; but this power does not consist solely in capturing all that it
can, all that is possible, of a matter defined as phylum. The apparatus of
capture also appropriates the war machine, the instruments of polarization,
and the anticipation-prevention mechanisms. This is to say, conversely,
that anticipation-prevention mechanisms have a high power of
transference: they are at work not only in primitive societies, but move into
the towns that ward off the State-form, into the States that ward off capitalism,
into capitalism itself, insofar as it wards off and repels its own limits.
And they are not satisfied to switch over to other powers but form new focal
points of resistance and contagion, as we have seen in the case of ”band”
phenomena, which have their own towns, their own brand of internationalism,
etc. Similarly, war machines have a power of metamorphosis, which of
course allows them to be captured by States, but also to resist that capture
and rise up again in other forms, with other ”objects” besides war (revolution?).
Each power is a force of deterritorialization that can go along with
the others or go against them (even primitive societies have their vectors of
deterritorialization). Each process can switch over to other powers, but
also subordinate other processes to its own power（《千层平原》，437-438）. 
