德里达：什么是世界主义权利和他者单语主义式公正？
=============================
发布时间：2008-06-11 21:42
无条件的好客实际上至今仍是不现实的，无法被铭写为规则和立法，没法立即被译入政治。它总有风险，会造成病态的效果。但我们无法不将这种毫无保留的好客当作一种参照。这是种绝对之极，没有它，我们对好客的欲望、概念和经验，以及想法，都没有了意义。再说一遍，这绝对之极不是一个“康德式理念”，而是我们裁断、判定直接和具体的急务之出发点。我们的政治任务因而仍是去找到最好的立法调度，最好的司法条件，以保证在任何既定的情形里，关于好客的伦理没有在原则上被违犯----而且还应被尽可能地尊重。为此，我们必须改变法律、习惯、幻觉、一整个“文化”。这就是这一刻我们之所需。
Inseparable from the thinking of justice itself, unconditional hospitality nevertheless remains impracticable as such. One cannot inscribe it in rules or in legislation. If one wants to translate it immediately into a politics, it always risks having perverse effects. But fully aware of those risks, we cannot and must not dispense with the reference to an unreserved hospitality. It is an absolute pole, without which the desire, the concept and experience, and the very thought of hospitality would not make any sense. Again, this 'pole' is not a 'Kantian idea', but the place from which immediate and concrete urgencies are dictated. Thus the political task remains to find the best 'legislative' transaction, the best 'juridical' conditions to ensure that, in any given situation, the ethics of hospitality is not violated in its principle - and that it is respected as much as possible. To that end, one has to change laws, habits, phantasms, a whole 'culture'. That is what is needed at this moment. The violence of xenophobic or nationalistic reactions is also a symptom. The task is as urgent today as it is difficult: everywhere, particularly in a Europe that tends to close itself off to the outside to the extent that it claims to open itself within (the conventions of Schengen). The international legislative demands a re-casting. The concept and the experience of the 'refugees' in this century have undergone a mutation which makes politics and the legal system seem radically archaic. The words 'refugee', 'exile', 'deported', 'displaced person' and even 'foreigner' have changed their meaning; they call up another discourse, another practical response and change the entire horizon of 'the political', of citizenship, of belonging to a nation, and of the state.
德里达在这里隐含了对从康德到哈贝马斯的关于世界主义权利的论述的发展。康德在《实用人类学》尤其是在＜世界主义权利＞一文中对世界公民的个人权利的划定，在德里达这里仍被看作资产阶级法权的一部分，是先验的，其保证和落实，是基于那个世界共和国的建立；它的到来，仍如哈贝马斯在《后民族集体聚》里所展望，依赖于那个世界公共政治领域的建立的完善。在我们在新世纪到来时跟着哈贝马斯热切期待这种互联网和全球化中涌现的世界公共政治领域内的新气象后之后的失落后，我们是深刻体会到了这种“先验”之无力。
一种调节康德所说的“普遍好客”的世界主义权利(Weltbuergerrecht），本应成为一种巨大的进步的角度，如果我们的国际机构想要实施这的话，而它们远远没有做到这一点。而康德是早就很好地设定了执行这一法则的限制和条件的：只赋予这样那样的公民，只作为访问权(Besuchsrecht），不作不居留权(Gastrecht），没有国与国之间的任何契约，如申根协议。我们不得不发明一种新的法律，来破除这些限制；这也要求我们达到一种超越法律的公正。这就又要求我们发明新的国际立法机构，它将不属于国家或事涉反对某些国家的霸权的那些国家之间的双边契约；但肯定也不是[象哈贝马斯相信的那样]靠了一个全球 国家，单个的全球国家！据我了解，康德和阿连特都是不相信能有这样一个单个的全球国家的。我很知道这一道谜是不可解的。但是，如果一项任务同时也是知识的对象，一认识就可知道，这样的任务还算是一项任务么？
A cosmopolitical right (Weltbuergerrecht) that would regulate what Kant called 'universal hospitality' would already today constitute the perspective of an immense progress if our international agencies wanted to put it into effect, which is far from being the case. And yet Kant has well circumscribed the limits and conditions for the execution of such a law (accorded only to citizens as such, from state to state, and merely as a right of visit (Besuchsrecht), not as the right of residence (Gastrecht), without any special contract between states (such as the European agreements drawn up in Schengen)). One would have to invent a law (but also a justice beyond the law) which lifts these limitations. One should invent the law-making agency which would not simply be of the state or bilateral contracts between states which fight against the hegemony of certain states. But certainly not a global state, a single global state! I refer back to what we just said about the state. Neither Kant nor Arendt, by the way, who you cite at times, believe in the possibility of a single global state. I know very well that this riddle seems insoluble. But a task whose solution is by the same token the object of a knowledge, a task which a simple recognition would render accessible, would this still be a task? 
德里达是干脆将这种权利建立在了对于人类好客的弥撒亚式推延和展望上，承认了人类个人的世界主义权利的脆弱和无保障，承认它的不可能和在现实中的容易败坏，但将这种权利当作了“绝对的一极”，作为一种由未来出发的政治，一种通过未来来教育我们当前的政治的参照系，当作我们的司法-政治的出发点。这是对康德的世界主义权利学说的有力发展。
