必须有一门《纯粹欲望批判》才行
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-07 10:17
 我们的处境，我作为教师的一个严重处境：我知道这对孩子们不好，但我有什么办法，这是我的责任，我必须还是这样去做。
齐泽克认为，这是康德伦理学的必然后果，也正是拉康认为必须用萨德来互补康德的原因：必须有一门《纯粹欲望批判》才行。资本主义无出路了，金融资本主义得了结石症了，疗救处，在我们的欲望。 我们得学会真的去欲望了，像资本主义时期早期人们所做的那样：
So there is always something sublime about pronouncing a judgement that defines our duty: in it, I ”elevate an object to the dignity of the Thing” (Lacan's definition of sublimation). The full acceptance of this paradox also compels us to reject any reference to ”duty” as an excuse: ”I know this is heavy and can be painful, but what can I do, this is my duty…” The standard motto of ethical rigor is ”There is no excuse for not accomplishing one's duty!”; although Kant's ”Du kannst, denn du sollst! (You can, because you must!)” seems to offer a new version of this motto, he implicitly complements it with its much more uncanny inversion: ”There is no excuse for accomplishing one's duty!”10 The reference to duty as the excuse to do our duty should be rejected as hypocritical; suffice it to recall the proverbial example of a severe sadistic teacher who subjects his pupils to merciless discipline and torture. Of course, his excuse to himself (and to others) is: ”I myself find it hard to exert such pressure on the poor kids, but what can I do-it's my duty!” The more pertinent example is that of a Stalinist politician who loves mankind, but nonetheless performs horrible purges and executions; his heart is breaking while he is doing it, but he cannot help it, it's his Duty towards the Progress of Humanity…
What we encounter here is the properly perverse attitude of adopting the position of the pure instrument of the big Other's Will: it's not my responsibility, it's not me who is effectively doing it, I am merely an instrument of the higher Historical Necessity… The obscene jouissance of this situation is generated by the fact that I conceive of myself as exculpated for what I am doing: isn't it nice to be able to inflict pain on others with the full awareness that I'm not responsible for it, that I merely fulfill the Other's Will…this is what Kantian ethics prohibits. This position of the sadist pervert provides the answer to the question: How can the subject be guilty when he merely realizes an ”objective”, externally imposed necessity? By subjectively assuming this ”objective necessity,” i.e. by finding enjoyment in what is imposed on him. So, at its most radical, Kantian ethics is NOT ”sadist,” but precisely what prohibits assuming the position of a Sadean executioner.
In a final twist, Lacan thus nonetheless undermines the thesis of ”Sade as the truth of Kant.” It is no accident that the same seminar in which Lacan first deployed the inherent link between Kant and Sade also contains the detailed reading of Antigone in which Lacan delineates the contours of an ethical act that DOES successfully avoid the trap of the Sadean perversion as its hidden truth-in insisting on her unconditional demand for her brother's proper burial, Antigone does NOT obey a command that humiliates her, a command effectively uttered by a sadistic executioner… So the main effort of Lacan's seminar on the Ethics of Psychoanalysis is precisely to break up the vicious cycle of Kant avec Sade. How is this possible? Only if-in contrast with Kant-one asserts that the faculty of desiring is not in itself ”pathological.” In short, Lacan asserts the necessity of a ”critique of pure desire”: in contrast to Kant, for whom our capacity to desire is thoroughly ”pathological” (since, as he repeatedly stresses, there is no a priori link between an empirical object and the pleasure this object generates in the subject), Lacan claims that there is a ”pure faculty of desire,” since desire does have a non-pathological, a priori object-cause-this object, of course, is what Lacan calls objet petit a（齐泽克《康德与萨德：理想的一对儿》）.
