我们应该拿陈丹青的“内心”怎么办？？--诸众时代的艺术
=============================
发布时间：2011-01-16 11:22
 我们应该拿陈丹青的“内心”怎么办？
我们知道，社会、世界社会越来越中心化，世界越来越小，越来越局促，我们越来越没有栖息地，我们的可怜的内心，也越来越像贪官家里的现金，再也想象不出新的乌托邦，当作保险箱，来存放它。这个时候，我们应该拿陈丹青们说的“内心”怎么办？
哲学家内杰里的建议是：将这个“内心”杂种化，杂交它，将它与千千万万别的内心杂糅到一块儿，捏出一个新的来，它的新名字叫“诸众”。
而这他说就是艺术，去艺术地行动的意思：去创造出新的存在，在我们既有的人类生物材料上创造出新的存在，让满天飞舞的一条条鲜肉有一个着落，将它导向各种独特体（《诸众时代的文化与艺术》）。诸众是锻造出来的。
所以，当代艺术的任务，照他的理解，是我们从内心撤离，而进入另外一个新的内心----诸众的内心。世界已经完成，界限只有一个，其内在价值全都扭曲和变态，当代艺术的任务，是在这个全球机器里，去不断去突破其新的内在界限（同上），将它们当气球来一个个戳破。他们冲出自己的内心（那里是毒气室或这个污染的大气层了），扑入那个诸众----诸众只有一个内心，但它无限地独特。
艺术家成为这新的诸众的一个器官。他们疯狂地制造图像，他们策动抽象符号来起义；警察有很多摄像头，诸众却有更多，且更维基；政府搞暗杀，而诸众家家户户都有杀手，艺术家就是那提供装备的人。
1-Yet while the circuit of cultural
communication is perfect and self-sufficient, this spirit can only proceed
by nourishing itself on things extraneous and other: bodily desire, the
freedom of the multitudes, the power of languages. In the horrible
abstraction of telematic communication, something subjectivates itself:
the spirit of the multitude. In a world of perverted signs, someone
produces simple signs of truth: look at Basquiat, his infantile signs and
utopian descriptions... Production has become linguistic; consequently,
subjectivity now presents itself through language itself. The abstraction
of communication becomes the body of singularities... Thus the multitude
is born.
It is downwardly interactive:dominating, disintegrating, and finally producing that which lies below
it. Wars are recounted in languages that range from the obfuscation of
reality to the narration of global fantasies. The documentation of war
becomes a video game. And yet, when the multitude discovers itself
within the neutralization of life, the whole sordid construction collapses
in a shambles. It began in Vietnam, the multitudinous disintegration of
truth as recounted by power: a few photographers and the occasional
philosophically-minded soldier were enough to reveal the blood and
tears with which that war was rife. Since then the mechanisms of
demystification and the capacity to seize the world in its live immediacy
have become viruses that proliferate as violently as an epidemic.
2-it turned out that the multitude possessed more cameras than the
police, infinitely more; the image of the policeman-assassin became
familiar to every household... The multitude rebelled by means of its
own capacity to produce images, rendering rebellious the abstraction of
signs. No longer was it possible to transform the world merely by
interpreting it: the last philosophical project, appropriated by those
experts of communication Adorno would have defined as fascists, was
no longer viable. In the words of a certain bearded old man: the only
possible interpretation of the world consisted in its transformation.
The multitude is an ensemble of proliferating singularities,
capable of expressing new linguistic determinations. In its classic form,
the dialectic leads back to the One, but this new dialectic is chaotic – the
multitudes are ensembles of atoms that meet in accordance with ever
untimely and exceptional clinamena. There is therefore no dialectic in the
sense of an opposition between living within the structures of biopower,
on the one hand, and freely and antagonistically travelling them as
biopolitical subjects, on the other. The only problem that concerns us
today, when we consider the new cultural determinations in imperial
space, is that of seizing the moment of intersection, the determination of
the event, the innovations that traverse the chaotic ensemble of the
multitude. It’s a matter of understanding when biopolitical expression
triumphs over the expression of biopower. There are neither syntheses
nor Aufhebungen; there are only oppositions, varied expressions,
multiplicities of linguistic tensions that escape in every direction. The
passage from modernity to postmodernity is characterized by the
immeasurability that postmodernity introduces: an immeasurability
that marks the end of all criteria of measure proposed and imposed by
modern rationalism. The measure and instrumental reason that
presented themselves spontaneously during the golden age of modernity
(between humanism and Descartes), that were expressed as the
metaphysical synthesis of an ordered world in its silver age, b
3-this ontological dimension of
innovative chaos consists precisely in the absence of measure. The
monster is the absence of measure, or perhaps new measure – but who
can define the negative and the positive, exodus and constituent capacity,
from within the transition?
4-But if, with globalization, human space no longer knows multiple limits but
only one limit—its external circumference—then once this limit is
reached, every subsequent expression can only be directed inward. There
is a line of continuity that gives meaning to this greatest possible
expansion of self-reflection; it’s without doubt the final Prometheanism,
the final universalism of bourgeois culture, but perhaps it could also be
defined as the first determination of a liberated humanity’s Gattungswesen.
All of history before globalization has led us to this limit: it wanted to
mark the range of Western culture’s dominion, but at the same time it
reveals the greatest possible (and frequently monstrous) effect of a
process of contradictions and struggles, of the genealogy of a subject that
intends to be uncontainable but finds itself right there, within those
limits. The world scene is therefore not simply a horizon: it’s a genuine
scenography, and the props (post-Ballets russes) have become part of the
drama. The world scene is both unlimited and finite; it lives off this
monstrous confrontation. On this scene, the end of history can be declared
just as well as its full realization. It is by corroborating this paradox
(affirmatively or negatively) that a work achieves aesthetic significance.
The world has become both enormous and very small; we’re in a situation
worthy of Pascal. But there is no longer any God. The space is smooth
and superficial; the immanence of value entrusts itself only to the works
of men. What does it mean to be an artist in this situation?
5-Tremendous passions run through this incapacity of flesh to become body. Once, during the great epoch
that preceded 1968, this incapacity was lived as an opening towards
utopia: the literary and aesthetic avant-gardes had to create utopia. The
end of the world drew closer, to the extent that utopia swirled around
the extreme capacity of collective praxis to construct reality. The
objective, the masterpiece, was the Apocalypse, just as it was for the
great pre-Christian authors... Yet in postmodernity—here, in our own
time— it’s no longer possible to be prophetic. We reflect on the Apocalypse
without being prophetic; we speak of vanguards without being utopian:
the world has become complete; all attention is directed inward; the
escape routes have been blocked. The only possibility left for us is that of
changing the world from within. The slogan “Another world is possible”
implies an exodus that leads to ourselves. Every time the limit is reached
(and it’s a limit without a beyond, one that cannot be surpassed), we
cannot but redirect our attention onto the present kairòs... But what is the
kairòs? In Greek culture it was the moment in time marked by the flight of
the arrow: that was a civilization that still envisioned a future, and
hence a relationship between releasing the arrow and seeing it arrive.
The arrow launched into the sky could reach the stars. Here, however,
the kairòs is the arrow that strikes our own heart, the arrow that returns
from the stellar limit. Kairòs is the necessity (but also the possibility) of
taking ourselves as the starting point of a creative project. It’s the
possibility of transforming our bodies, not just of rendering them hybrid
by an interaction with the outside world, but of constructing them and
rendering them hybrid from within. It’s the possibility of engaging in
politics by leading all the elements of life back to a poetic reconstruction.
The very term “biopolitics” implies this constitutive project. In short,
6-when the Copernican revolution has
definitively exhausted itself and Ptolemy and the centrality of the kairòs
have become the only reference point, when all this is the case, what
does it mean to develop the creative and constitutive spirit of artistic
practice? When the only possibility for action, artistic and ethical,
consists in moving out from within being, through biopolitical practice,
such that every making is a transformation of the very physical and
spiritual essence of the human body; when the structure of the social has
become so central and the world so small and restricted that there is no
longer any possibility of leaving this habitat behind, when utopian
illusions (illusions of other topoi) no longer present themselves; what,
then, does it mean to act artistically? It means constructing new being; it
means making global space reflect back on itself, re-directing it towards
the existence of singularities. Will this mean acting to eliminate death, to
7-dissolve the internal limits of the global machine? The monster promises
us nothing less.
The multitude is an ensemble of singularities, but each
singularity is also an ensemble of multitudes. The multitude is an
ensemble of bodies, but each body is a multitude of bodies. This machine
struggles for life; it struggles within life and against death. The practice
of the multitude is nothing but this constant proliferation of vital
experiences that have in common the negation of death, the rejection and
definitive refusal of that which stalls the life process. The global world as
we know it, as Empire presents it to us in the political order, is a closed
world, subject to the entropy that results when space and time have
been exhausted. But the multitude that acts within this closed world has
learned to transform it, by passing through each subject and towards
each singularity making up the world. Foucault once said that when we
thought history was over, we find that it renews itself on the vertical
axis that we are. That is what’s happening to us, as multitude and
multitudinous body. Only within our own transformation, in a ferocious
struggle against death, can the practice of the multitude begin（《诸众时代的文化与艺术》）
