批评与艺术在我们时代的新关系
=============================
发布时间：2009-10-25 09:27
 The space that supports the museum is this incessant and absolute negation
of oneself and the other, in which the split is reconciled for an instant and the
spectator, negating himself, accepts himself, only to become immersed, in the
next moment, in a new negation. In this uncanny abyss our aesthetic
apprehension of art finds its foundation: its positive value in our society and its
metaphysical consistency in the sky of aesthetics rest on the work of negating
this nothingness that laboriously goes around its annihilation. Only in this step
backward that we force it to take toward its shadow does the work of art
reacquire for us a familiar dimension that can be an object of rational inquiry.
If, then, it is true that the critic leads art to its negation, it is only in this shadow
and this death that art (our aesthetic idea of art) sustains itself and finds its
reality. Thus the critic ends up resembling the Inquisitor in Ivan Karamazov's
little poem, who, in order to make possible a Christian world, has to negate
Christ when he has him before his eyes.
Today, however, it seems that this irritating yet irreplaceable instrument of our
aesthetic apprehension of art is undergoing a crisis that could lead to its
eclipse. In one of the ”Unfriendly Observations” collected by Robert Musil in
his Nachla Lebzeiten ( Posthumous papers of a living author), Musil jokingly
asked ”whether kitsch, increased by one and then two dimensions of kitsch,
would not become increasingly bearable and increasingly less kitsch,” and,
trying to discover the relationship between kitsch and art by means of a
curious mathematical calculation, concluded that they appear to be the very
same thing. 8 After aesthetic judgment taught us to distinguish art from its
shadow and authenticity from inauthenticity, our experience, on the contrary,
forces us to face the embarrassing truth that it is precisely to nonart that we
owe, today, our most original aesthetic emotions. Who has not experienced at
least once, faced with kitsch, a pleasant freeing sensation, affirming, against
all suggestions of his critical sense: This object is aesthetically ugly, and yet I
like it and I am touched by it? One could surmise that the whole vast area of
the outside world and of our sensitivity that critical judgment had pushed back
into the limbo of non-art has started to become conscious of its necessity and
of its dialectical function, and that, in a rebellion against the tyranny of good
taste, it has shown up to claim its rights.
However, another and far more extravagant phenomenon presents itself today
for our consideration. While the work of art is intelligible to us only by way of
the comparison with its shadow, in order to appreciate the beauty of natural
objects, as Kant sensed, we have never needed to measure them against
their negation. Thus it would certainly never have occurred to us to ask
whether a storm was more or less successful or a flower more or less original,
because our judgment did not perceive behind natural production the
otherness of a formal principle, although this used to be a ques tion that we
spontaneously asked before a painting, a novel, or any other work of genius.
If we observe now what is offered by our experience, we notice that this
relationship is in the process somehow of being reversed right under our
noses. More and more frequently, contemporary art presents us with
productions before which it is no longer possible to resort to the traditional
mechanism of the aesthetic judgment, and for which the antagonistic polarity
art∣non-art appears totally inadequate. In front of a ”ready-made,” for
instance, in which the otherness of the formal-creative principle has been
31
replaced by the alienation of the non-artistic object that is inserted by force
into the sphere of art, critical judgment is, so to speak, immediately confronted
with itself, or to be more precise, with its image in reverse: what it is supposed
to trace back to non-art is already non-art on its own, and the critic's operation
is limited to an ID check. Contemporary art, in its most recent tendencies, has
further advanced this process and has by now produced that ”reciprocal
ready-made” Duchamp was thinking of when he suggested the use of a
Rembrandt painting as an ironing board. The extreme object-centeredness of
contemporary art, through its holes, stains, slits, and nonpictorial materials,
tends increasingly to identify the work of art with the non-artistic product.
Thus, becoming aware of its shadow, art immediately receives in itself its own
negation, and in bridging the gap that used to separate it from criticism, itself
becomes the logos of art and of its shadow, that is, critical reflection on art. In
contemporary art, it is critical judgment that lays bare its own split, thus
suppressing and rendering superfluous its own space.
At the same time, a contrary process is taking place in the way we think of
nature. While we are no longer able to judge a work of art aesthetically, our
intelligence of nature has grown so opaque, and, moreover, the presence in it
of the human element has grown to such an extent, that sometimes, in front of
a landscape, we spontaneously compare it to its shadow, wondering whether
it is aesthetically beautiful or ugly, and we have ever more serious difficulties
distinguishing from a work of art a mineral precipitate or a piece of wood that
has been eroded and filed by the chemical action of time.
Thus we find it natural to speak today of ”land conservancy” in the same way
that we speak of the preservation of a work of art, both ideas that would have
struck other eras as inconceivable. It is also likely that we will soon create
institutes to restore natural beauty just like those for the restoration of works
of art, without recognizing that such an idea presupposes a radical
transformation of our relationship to nature, and that the inability to penetrate
a landscape without spoiling it and the desire to purify it from such penetration
are two sides of the same coin. What used to present itself to aesthetic
judgment as absolute otherness has now become something familiar and
natural, while natural beauty, which was, for our judgment, a familiar reality,
has become something radically alien: art has become nature, and nature, art.
The first consequence of this reversal is that criticism has relinquished its
proper function--namely, the exercise of that judgment that we have defined
as the logos of art and of its shadow--and has become scientific research on
art according to the schemes of information theory (which considers art to be
precisely on this side of the distinction between art and non-art) or, in the best
of cases, a search for the impossible meaning of art from a non-aesthetic
perspective, which however always ends up relapsing into aesthetics.
Critical judgment, then, seems to be going through an eclipse, about whose
duration and consequences we can only make guesses. One of these--and
not the most pessimistic--is that if we do not start to ask right now, forcefully,
about the foundation of critical judgment, the idea of art as we know it will slip
through our fingers without a new idea to take its place effectively. Unless,
that is, we resolve to extract from this temporary opaqueness the question
capable of burning from head to toe the phoenix of aesthetic judgment and to
allow a more original, that is, more initial, way to think art.（阿甘本《没有内容的人》，25-29） 
