排练斯特劳斯
=============================
发布时间：2008-12-11 09:45
 这是一个斯的学生Thomas Pangle的最近演讲，本是对于他的老师的思想的演出，我们这是在课堂里重新排练通过他的学生说出的话。在这里，政治哲学不是被归结为几点，而是要象话剧一样，被响亮地表达出来，并进一步充分挖掘文本里的theatralite，念出得使我们排练者自己感到自信，感到顶天立地，通天地之气于此身为止。
首先，什么是好的自由教育liberal education？斯特劳斯认为，这是那些天生或天性就是morally serious道德上严肃的年青人，一边与年长的特别是家族里的年长的政治家作着亲切的交往，一边对文学作品艺术作品作着沉思，一边请人教着演讲术和修辞术，一边读着历史和外地风物描写地成长。它 decisively influenced by “the morally serious” (spoudaioi), the “gentlemen” (kaloikagathoi), who possess the virtues aimed at (though by no means automatically produced) by a truly liberating or “liberal education.” In its original, natural form such an education proceeds by “familiar intercourse” with “elder statesmen,” by “receiving instruction from paid teachers in the art of speaking,” by “reading histories and books of travel, by meditating on the works of the poets” (“the fountains of that education”), and, “of course by taking part in political life.” “All this requires leisure on the part of youths as well as on the part of their elders”; it is the preserve of “wealth of a certain kind: a kind of wealth the administration of which, to say nothing of its acquisition, does not take up much of [one‘ｓ] time” (LAM, 10-11).什么是最好的政权theｂｅｓｔ　ｒｅｇｉｍｅ？它是一种衡量。它是理想国？它是用来对比出我们在实际政治中的感知和想象的局限的，它并不是我们的政治追求目标。它只是一种不当真的但细微的思想实验。在斯特劳斯这里，ｒｅｐｕｂｌｉｃ这个字常是直指柏拉图的理想国，也就是那些Ｓｏｃｔａｉｃｓ苏格拉底之徒们的心中的政治和政权蓝图，不应译作共和国，倒可以说是理想国，如他说的，我们今天的自由主义不是真正的自由主义了，而古典的理想国式自由主义，才是那种由自由教育培养出来的年青人搞出的政治风格。“the best regime,” conceived not as an “ideal” to be realized, or even approached and worked toward, but rather as a subtly playful thought-experiment meant to reveal the limitations on what we can expect from all actual political lif
e. As Strauss puts it, concluding his major analysis of Plato: “Socrates makes clear in the Republic of what character the city would have to be in order to satisfy the highest need of man. By letting us see that the city construct ed in accordance with this requirement is not possible, he lets us see the essential limits, the nature, of the city.” A bit earlier in the same essay, Strauss stated this “in a manner which is perhaps more easily intelligible today”: “the Republic conveys the broadest and deepest analysis of political idealism ever made” (CM, 61, 127, 138).
为什么要用隐微ｅｓｏｔｅｒｉｃ写作来写？那不光是为了保护哲学家自己，而且也是为了保护哲学家最想传达到的那些听众。专制暴政下，政治集权主义专制和美国式的大众民主对于斯特劳斯都算是专制暴政，他这样写，是要教读者也这样隐微地颠覆式地批判着暴政地去读和写，学会了这样的读和写，批判之自由，就可面临各种暴政而仍存在于地下。Tyranny assumes many guises, not always easy to penetrate. In most if not all times and places, the Socratics find themselves dwelling in societies under the thumb of more or less tyrannical rulers, usually dominating in the name of various narrow and narrowing orthodoxies. The philosopher will need to struggle to elude persecution, while unmasking tyranny—not only or mainly for himself, but especially for all those whom he wishes to reach and to teach by his public communication, both philosophic and republican.。。。These covertly subversive critiques are meant to help many readers to begin to learn techniques of writing and speaking by which freedom of critical thinking—not only philosophic, but also civic republican—can survive “underground” (waiting the rare chance to resurface) in all sorts of more or less oppressive regimes.
人是这样构成的，其精神只有在那种本质上是私人的、不安的心灵之生活中才能被充分满足，这种心灵之生活完全致力于表达存在之谜。这种沉思式生活是扎根于对ｅｒｏｓ的智性式和精神式纯化中，它不能被政治化［也就是说，不能通过政治来纯化它］，也不能去增进和激活政治野心或政治权威。“Man is so built” that his spirit finds its fullest satisfaction only in the life of the essentially private, restless mind, given over to “articulating the riddle of being” (NRH, 75). This contemplative life, which is rooted in an intellectual and spiritual purification of eros, cannot be politicized, cannot animate political ambition or authority.
人原初不是哲学的，人天生是一个政治动物。斯特劳斯的解释将我们原来对亚里士多德的这话的理解推翻了：人只是搞搞政治的动物罢了，把政治搞得像是动物在搞一样，不够哲学！斯特劳斯的写作中常有这样的ａｎｔａｇｏｎｉｓｔｉｃ式的突然将一个我们理解成习惯的意思颠倒过来的从天而降式的纠错之举，让我们只能耳提面命，或被提耳命面。我们人最深的F、最哲学的期求，被收锢在、被穿透和被塑造于一种由个人和社会的更直接的身体和精神需求的复杂混合里了。公民社会的形成，只是为了响应这些低于哲学的自然要求，［下面这句就象是德语了］、公民社会的特殊优才、需求和部分的实现，才形成［这句话需要排练，甚至改编］or humankind is primarily not philosophic; rather—to go so far as Aristotle (Politics 1.2 and 3.6)-“the human is by nature a political animal.” In other words, humanity’s deepest, philosophic longing is encased in, penetrated and molded by, a complex concatenation of more immediate physical and spiritual needs, personal as well as social. It is chiefly in response to these sub-philosophic natural requirements that civil society (with its cornerstone the family) and its specific excellences and demands and (partial) fulfillment comes into being.
然后是那个神学－政治问题：人真能能获得关于善的知识么？没有这种知识，我们是无法借我们的生然能力独自或集体地得到引导的；或许是需要到得到天启，才会得到这种知识？斯特劳斯将它简化：是去过一种服从式的爱的生活，还是去过一种自由洞见下的生活，两者是无法调和的，坚持一方必然会牺牲另一方，只是程度上有不同罢了。Strauss articulated the “theologico-political problem,” in a nutshell, as the “fundamental question,” whether “men can acquire that knowledge of the good without which they cannot guide their lives individually or collectively by the unaided efforts of their natural powers, or whether they are dependent for that knowledge on Divine Revelation.” “No alternative,” Strauss continued, “is more fundamental than this: . . . a life of obedient love versus a life of free insight.” And, he added, “In every attempt at harmonization, in every synthesis however impressive, one of the two opposed elements is sacrificed, more or less subtly but in any event surely, to the other.”
