政治伦理学：在民主国家，这是一种斗争逃避姿态？
=============================
发布时间：2008-11-21 09:53
 下面的文章里，表面上，麦金太尔是在给我们提供政治伦理选择，但其实，这一选择是很逃避。他说，两党的选择是被做好的假的选择，这是政治系统的致命的无法改变的现状，我们不是对候选人投票，而是对这个系统投票，对这个政治系统说NO，就是不投票。对这一系统。
与斯特劳斯和阿连特的想将政治单独划开，使政治成为ideAL一样，麦的这一提议，也是在求政治上的纯洁，要用一种决绝的姿态去求真政治和纯政治。
这让我想起朗西埃的看法：不投票不能代表你的政治纯洁了，更不能使的政治对共同体起作用。相反，我们应比投票更积极，我们应象艺术家那样去激活我们的政治生活，我们参与进去，使它至少成为一趟混水。德里达在《马克思的各种幽灵》里说是，我们应该在其中做戏中戏，上演给人看。将政治舞台改造成为剧场，将学校、媒体都接通到这个剧院。
政治无法通过伦理学原则来被澄清，伦理学反而是对政治的消毒和清洗。伦理说不清的，司法定不清的，我们才用政治来解决！如用司法和伦理弄得清，我们也就用不着政治了！
The Only Vote Worth Casting in November
Alasdair MacIntyre
University of Notre Dame
When offered a choice between two politically intolerable alternatives, it is important to choose neither. And when that choice is presented in rival arguments and debates that exclude from public consideration any other set of possibilities, it becomes a duty to withdraw from those arguments and debates, so as to resist the imposition of this false choice by those who have arrogated to themselves the power of framing the alternatives. These are propositions which in the abstract may seem to invite easy agreement. But, when they find application to the coming presidential election, they are likely to be rejected out of hand. For it has become an ingrained piece of received wisdom that voting is one mark of a good citizen, not voting a sign of irresponsibility. But the only vote worth casting in November is a vote that no one will be able to cast, a vote against a system that presents one with a choice between Bush's conservatism and Kerry's liberalism, those two partners in ideological debate, both of whom need the other as a target.
Why should we reject both? Not primarily because they give us wrong answers, but because they answer the wrong questions. What then are the right political questions? One of them is: What do we owe our children? And the answer is that we owe them the best chance that we can give them of protection and fostering from the moment of conception onwards. And we can only achieve that if we give them the best chance that we can both of a flourishing family life, in which the work of their parents is fairly and adequately rewarded, and of an education which will enable them to flourish. These two sentences, if fully spelled out, amount to a politics. It is a politics that requires us to be pro-life, not only in doing whatever is most effective in reducing the number of abortions, but also in providing healthcare for expectant mothers, in facilitating adoptions, in providing aid for single-parent families and for grandparents who have taken parental responsibility for their grandchildren. And it is a politics that requires us to make as a minimal economic demand the provision of meaningful work that provides a fair and adequate wage for every working parent, a wage sufficient to keep a family well above the poverty line. 
The basic economic injustice of our society is that the costs of economic growth are generally borne by those least able to afford them and that the majority of the benefits of economic growth go to those who need them least. Compare the rise in wages of ordinary working people over the last thirty years to the rise in the incomes and wealth of the top twenty percent. Compare the value of minimum wage now to its value then and next compare the value of the remuneration of CEOs to its value then. What is needed to secure family life is a sufficient minimum income for every family and that can perhaps best be secured by some version of the negative income tax, proposed long ago by Milton Friedman, a tax that could be used to secure a large and just redistribution of income and so of property. 
We note at this point that we have already broken with both parties and both candidates. Try to promote the pro-life case that we have described within the Democratic Party and you will at best go unheard and at worst be shouted down. Try to advance the case for economic justice as we have described it within the Republican Party and you will be laughed out of court. Above all, insist, as we are doing, that these two cases are inseparable, that each requires the other as its complement, and you will be met with blank incomprehension. For the recognition of this is precluded by the ideological assumptions in terms of which the political alternatives are framed. Yet at the same time neither party is wholeheartedly committed to the cause of which it is the ostensible defender. Republicans happily endorse pro-choice candidates, when it is to their advantage to do so. Democrats draw back from the demands of economic justice with alacrity, when it is to their advantage to do so. And in both cases rhetorical exaggeration disguises what is lacking in political commitment. 
In this situation a vote cast is not only a vote for a particular candidate, it is also a vote case for a system that presents us only with unacceptable alternatives. The way to vote against the system is not to vote.
