文化大革命，最后一场革命或最近一场革命
=============================
发布时间：2009-10-04 23:52
 The Cultural Revolution: The Last Revolution?
Alain Badiou
Why?
Why discuss the “Cultural Revolution”—which is the official name for a
long period of serious disturbances in communist China between 1965 and
1976? For at least three reasons:
1. The Cultural Revolution has been a constant and lively reference of
militant activity throughout the world, and particularly in France, at least
between 1967 and 1976. It is part of our political history and the basis for
the existence of the Maoist current, the only true political creation of the
sixties and seventies. I can say “our,” I was part of it, and in a certain sense,
to quote Rimbaud, “I am there, I am still there.” In the untiring inventiveness
of the Chinese revolutionaries, all sorts of subjective and practical
trajectories have found their name. Already, to change subjectivity, to
live otherwise, to think otherwise: the Chinese—and then we—called that
positions 13:3  2005 by Duke University Press.
positions 13:3 Winter 2005 482
“revolutionarization.” They said: “To change the human being in what is
most profound.” They taught that in political practice, we must be both at
once “the arrow and the bull’s eye,” because the old worldview is also still
present within us. By the end of the sixties, we went everywhere: to the
factories, to the suburbs, to the countryside. Tens of thousands of students
became proletarian or went to live among the workers. For this too we had
the words of the Cultural Revolution: the “great exchanges of experience,”
“to serve the people,” and, always the essential slogan, the “mass alliance.”
We fought against the brutal inertia of the PCF [French Communist Party],
against its violent conservatism. In China too the party bureaucracy was
attacked; that was called “to struggle against revisionism.” Even the splits,
the confrontations between revolutionaries from different orientations, were
referred to the Chinese way: “To hunt down the black gangsters,” to be
finished with those who are “leftist in appearance and rightist in reality.”
When we met with a popular political situation, a factory strike or a confrontation
with the fascistic landlords, we knew that we had “to excel in
the discovery of the proletarian Left, to rally the Center, to isolate and
crush the Right.” Mao’s Little Red Book has been our guide, not at all, as
the dummies say, in the service of dogmatic catechism but, on the contrary,
in order for us to clarify and invent new ways in all sorts of disparate situations
that were unknown to us. With regard to all this, since I am not one
of those who cover their abandonment and their rallying to the established
reaction with references to the psychology of illusions or to the morality of
blindness, we can only quote our sources and pay homage to the Chinese
revolutionaries.
2. The Cultural Revolution is the typical example (yet another notion
from Maoism, the typical example: a revolutionary find that must be generalized)
of a political experience that saturates the form of the party-state.
I use the category of “saturation” in the sense given to it by Sylvain Lazarus:
1 I will attempt to show that the Cultural Revolution is the last significant
political sequence that is still internal to the party-state (in this case,
the Chinese Communist Party) and fails as such. Already, May ’68 and its
aftermath, that is something slightly different. The Polish movement or
Chiapas, that is something very different. The Political Organization, that
is something absolutely different. But without the saturation of the sixties
Badiou  The Cultural Revolution 483
and seventies, nothing would as yet be thinkable, outside the specter of the
party-state, or the parties-state.2
3. The Cultural Revolution is a great lesson in history and politics, in history
as thought from within politics (and not the other way around). Indeed,
depending on whether we examine this “revolution” (the word itself lies at
the heart of the saturation) according to the dominant historiography or
according to a real political question, we arrive at gripping disagreements.
What matters is for us to see clearly that the nature of this discord is not
of the order of empirical or positivist exactness or lack thereof. We can be
in agreement as to the facts and end up with judgments that are perfectly
opposed to one another. It is precisely this paradox that will serve us as a
point of entry into the subject matter.
全文总结：
In the end, the Cultural Revolution, even in its very impasse, bears witness
to the impossibility truly and globally to free politics from the framework
Badiou  The Cultural Revolution 507
of the party-state that imprisons it. It marks an irreplaceable experience of
saturation, because a violent will to find a new political path, to relaunch the
revolution, and to find new forms of the workers’ struggle under the formal
conditions of socialism ended in failure when confronted with the necessary
maintenance, for reasons of public order and the refusal of civil war, of the
general frame of the party-state.
We know today that all emancipatory politics must put an end to the
model of the party, or of multiple parties, in order to affirm a politics “without
party,” and yet at the same time without lapsing in the figure of anarchism,
which has never been anything else than the vain critique, or the
double, or the shadow, of the communist parties, just as the black flag is only
the double or the shadow of the red flag.
However, our debt to the Cultural Revolution remains enormous. Because,
tied to this grandiose and courageous saturation of the motif of the party,
as the contemporary of what clearly appears today as the last revolution
that was still attached to the motif of classes and of the class struggle, our
Maoism will have been the experience and the name of a capital transition.
And without this transition, or there where nobody is loyal to it, there is
nothing.
