斯特劳斯论自由教育
=============================
发布时间：2008-12-11 11:47
 开头他就说，祝贺你们获得了它，但我要警告你们，这是不好的自由教育。他的隐微写作：The liberal education which you have acquired will 
avert the danger that the warning will be understood as a counsel of despair.你们所获得的自由教育会让你们躲开了一种危险而进入另一种危险：由于你已得到这种所谓的自由教育，我的警告会被你们看作是绝望后的劝告。You have acquired a liberal education. ，I congratulate you on your achievement. 
If I were entitled to do so, I would praise you for your achievement. But I would be 
untrue to the obligation which I have undertaken if I did not supplement my 
congratulations with a warning. The liberal education which you have acquired will 
avert the danger that the warning will be understood as a counsel of despair.
要做文化的人，要为获得文化而奋斗，而文化就是对心灵的耢耘。这事复杂得很，教师帮不了你，因为老师只是其老师的学生，只有极少数人才是老师：自由教育只是好学生帮不大好的学生去研习那些伟大的心灵留下的书籍。Those teachers who are not in turn pupils 
are the great minds or, in order to avoid any ambiguity in a matter of such 
importance, the greatest minds. Such men are extremely rare. We are not likely to 
meet any of them in any classroom. We are not likely to meet any of them anywhere. 
It is a piece of good luck if there is a single one alive in one's time. For all 
practical purposes, pupils, of whatever degree of proficiency, have access to the 
teachers who are not in turn pupils, to the greatest minds, only through the great 
books. Liberal education will then consist in studying with the proper care the 
great books which the greatest minds have left behind -- a study in which the more 
experienced pupils assist the less experienced pupils, including the beginners.
自由教育就是我们努力着从现在不好的民主过渡到那个民主本来应该是的样子的学习过程。现在的民主是一种拉平的普遍的贵族统治，人人成了贵族，而本来是只有神之间才可以搞民主的。Democracy in a word is meant to be 
an aristocracy which has broadened into a universal aristocracy. Prior to the 
emergence of modern democracy some doubts were felt whether democracy thus 
understood is possible. As one of the two greatest minds among the theorists of 
democracy put it, ”If there were a people consisting of gods, it would rule itself 
democratically. A government of such perfection is not suitable for human beings.” 
This still and small voice has by now become a high-powered loudspeaker. There 
exists a whole science -- the science which I among thousands profess to teach, 
political science -- which so to speak has no other theme than the contrast between 
the original conception of democracy, or what one may call the ideal of democracy, 
and democracy as it is. According to an extreme view which is the predominant view 
in the profession, the ideal of democracy was a sheer delusion and the only thing 
which matters is the behavior of democracies and the behavior of men in democracies. 
Modem democracy, so far from being universal aristocracy, would be mass rule were it 
not for the fact that the mass cannot rule but is ruled by elites, i.e., groupings 
of men who for whatever reason are on top or have a fair chance to arrive at the 
top; one of the most important virtues required for the smooth working of democracy, 
as far as the mass is concerned, is said to be electoral apathy, i.e., lack of 
public spirit; not indeed the salt of the earth but the salt of modern democracy are 
those citizens who read nothing except the sports page and the comic section. 
Democracy is then not indeed mass rule but mass culture. A mass culture is a culture 
which can be appropriated by the meanest capacities without any intellectual and 
moral effort whatsoever and at a very low monetary price. But even a mass culture 
and precisely a mass culture requires a constant supply of what are called new 
ideas, which are the products of what are called creative minds: even singing 
commercials lose their appeal if they are not varied from time to time. But 
democracy, even if it is only regarded as the hard shell which protects the soft 
mass culture, requires in the long run qualities of an entirely different kind: 
qualities of dedication, of concentration, of breadth and of depth. Thus we 
understand most easily what liberal education means here and now. Liberal education 
is the counter-poison to mass culture, to the corroding effects of mass culture, to 
its inherent tendency to produce nothing but ”specialists without spirit or vision 
and voluptuaries without heart.” Liberal education is the ladder by which we try to 
ascend from mass democracy to democracy as originally meant. Liberal education is 
the necessary endeavor to found an aristocracy within democratic mass society. 
Liberal education reminds those members of a mass democracy who have ears to hear, 
of human greatness.
自由教育是由象苏格拉底这样的在我们和过往的伟大心灵之间穿针引线的人来开展。We are compelled to live with books. But life is too short to live 
with any but the greatest books. In this respect as well as in some others, we do 
well to take as our model that one among the greatest minds who because of his 
common sense is the mediator between us and the greatest minds. Socrates never wrote 
a book but be read books. Let me quote a statement of Socrates which says almost 
everything that has to be said on our subject, with the noble simplicity and quiet 
greatness of the ancients. ”Just as others are pleased by a good horse or dog or 
bird, I myself am pleased to an even higher degree by good friends. . . . And the 
treasures of the wise men of old which they left behind by writing them in books, I 
unfold and go through them together with my friends, and if we see something good, 
we pick it out and regard it as a great gain if we thus become useful to one 
another.” The man who reports this utterance, adds the remark: ”When I heard this, 
it seemed to me both that Socrates was blessed and that be was leading those 
listening to him toward perfect gentlemanship.” This report is defective since it 
does not tell us anything as to what Socrates did regarding those passages in the 
books of the wise men of old of which he did not know whether they were good. From 
another report we learn that Euripides once gave Socrates the writing of Heraclitus 
and then asked him for his opinion about that writing. Socrates said: ”What I have 
understood is great and noble; I believe this is also true of what I have not 
understood; but one surely needs for understanding that writing some special sort of 
a diver.”
美德是无法达到的，哲学家应该是达到他们的人，所以不好轻易称这个名的。我们总是不大完美地达到了幸福和知识，关于善的知识，我们总只是部分和侧面地得到。我们无法直接得到最高等级的自由教育。Education to perfect gentlemanship, to human excellence, liberal education 
consists in reminding oneself of human excellence, of human greatness. In what way, 
by what means does liberal education remind us of human greatness? We cannot think 
highly enough of what liberal education is meant to be. We have beard Plato's 
suggestion that education in the highest sense is philosophy. Philosophy is quest 
for wisdom or quest for knowledge regarding the most important, the highest, or the 
most comprehensive things; such knowledge, he suggested, is virtue and is happiness. 
But wisdom is inaccessible to man and hence virtue and happiness will always be 
imperfect. In spite of this, the philosopher, who, as such, is not simply wise, is 
declared to be the only true king; be is declared to possess all the excellences of 
which man's mind is capable, to the highest degree. From this we must draw the 
conclusion that we cannot be philosophers -- that we cannot acquire the highest form 
of education.
我常说刘小枫这样用一个埃斯库罗斯来打击欧里庇德斯的做法，是很小人的，是女人般小气的。斯特劳斯说，连柏拉图自己都感到，在写两个伟大的心灵之间的对话时，是很难拿捏得当的。Plato apparently felt that one could not write a dialogue between 
two men of the highest order. We must then do something which the greatest minds 
were unable to do. Let us face this difficulty -- a difficulty so great that it 
seems to condemn liberal education as an absurdity. Since the greatest minds 
contradict one another regarding the most important matters, they compel us to judge 
of their monologues; we cannot take on trust what any one of them says. On the other 
hand we cannot but notice that we are not competent to be judges. This state of 
things is concealed from us by a number of facile delusions. We somehow believe that 
our point of view is superior, higher than those of the greatest minds -- either 
because our point of view is that of our time, and our time, being later than the 
time of the greatest minds, can be presumed to be superior to their times; or else 
because we believe that each of the greatest minds was right from his point of view 
but not, as be claims, simply right: we know that there cannot be the simply true 
substantive view but only a simply true formal view; that formal view consists in 
the insight that every comprehensive view is relative to a specific perspective, or 
that all comprehensive views are mutually exclusive and none can be simply true. The 
facile delusions which conceal from us our true situation all amount to this, that 
we are, or can be, wiser than the wisest men of the past. We are thus induced to 
play the part not of attentive and docile listeners but of impresarios or lion- 
tamers. Yet we must face our awesome situation, created by the necessity that we try 
to be more than attentive and docile listeners, namely, judges, and yet we are not 
competent to be judges. As it seems to me, the cause of this situation is that we 
have lost all simply authoritative traditions in which we could trust, the nomos 
which gave us authoritative guidance, because our immediate teachers and teachers' 
teachers believed in the possibility of a simply rational society. Each of us here 
is compelled to find his bearings by his own powers however defective they may be
在自由教育中，我们禁不住因为understanding，而达到本来只有神才能看见我们人是如何来理解的，这样，斯特劳斯说，我们就间接和部分地体会到了我们的心灵的尊严----它的远处还有那么伟大的东西，我们望见了它一眼。We cannot exert our understanding without from time 
to time understanding something of importance; and this act of understanding may be 
accompanied by the awareness of our understanding, by the understanding of 
understanding, by noesis noeseos, and this is so high, so pure, so noble an 
experience that Aristotle could ascribe it to his God. This experience is entirely 
independent of whether what we understand primarily is pleasing or displeasing, fair or ugly. It leads us to realize that all evils are in a sense necessary if there is to be understanding. It enables us to accept all evils which befall us and which may well break our hearts in the spirit of good citizens of the city of God. By becoming aware of the dignity of the mind, we realize the true ground of the dignity of man and therewith the goodness of the world, whether we understand it as created or as uncreated, which is the home of man because it is the home of the human mind.
自由教育是要让我们先获得一份谦恭，但用一种傲然之气，来将一切我们获得的知识只当作opinions，摆脱学术名利场对我们的诱惑，来获得关于美丽事物的经验：Liberal education, which consists in the constant intercourse with the greatest minds, is a training in the highest form of modesty, not to say of 
humility. It is at the same time a training in boldness: it demands from us the 
complete break with the noise, the rush, the thoughtlessness, the cheapness of the 
Vanity Fair of the intellectuals as well as of their enemies. It demands from us the boldness implied in the resolve to regard the accepted views as mere opinions, or to regard the average opinions as extreme opinions which are at least as likely to be wrong as the most strange or the least popular opinions. Liberal education is liberation from vulgarity. The Greeks had a beautiful word for ”vulgarity”; they called it apeirokalia, lack of experience in things beautiful. Liberal education supplies us with experience in things beautiful.
