斯特劳斯教我们如何读;他读中写,写中读;他好像懂speech act theory
=============================
发布时间：2008-12-12 12:19
 Strauss was, above all, a reader. He taught his students how to read and how careful writers, like himself, wished to be read. Strauss expanded the scope of our reading to include forgotten figures and others who had been overlooked by the canon of political philosophy. Not only did he breathe new life into familiar figures and texts; he introduced new and unfamiliar writers like Al-Farabi, Judah Halevi, Maimonides, and Spinoza to the attention of political philosophers. He pioneered the study of politics and literature by focusing on the literary character of texts and highlighting the “old quarrel” between philosophy and poetry in his reading of thinkers like Plato and Nietzsche. He inquired into the rhetoric in which philosophical arguments are cast long before it became fashionable to talk about “speech acts” and the performative function of language. He paid special attention to ironies, jokes, and puns even in the most serious works and devoted one of his last books to a study of the comedies of Aristophanes. Strauss’s most important legacy was teaching his readers how to read. No one can be a Straussian who does not fundamentally love to read.
It is, of course, slightly disingenuous to suggest that Strauss taught the simple art of reading. No reading, we have been taught to believe, is ever innocent, and Strauss was scarcely a naive reader. He was in fact one of the great “masters of suspicion.” Strauss’s manner of reading unfolded from a single premise that he happened upon slowly and that he developed in a variety of contexts over many years—namely, that great writers often hide or conceal their most profound thoughts from all but the most careful and persistent readers. This seems a simple enough, even a commonsense premise. Do any of us ever say (or intend to say) all that we mean? Do we not speak in different ways to different people depending on the context of the conversation and the extent of our desire to communicate? Strauss’s discovery—actually, he called it a “rediscovery”—of esoteric writing can be attributed to a number of causes, from the simple desire to avoid persecution for unpopular or heterodox opinions, to a sense of “social responsibility” to uphold the dominant values of one’s society, to the wish to tantalize potential readers with the promise of buried treasure.
Strauss’s recovery of the esoteric tradition has been deeply controversial, to say the least. In the first place, there is the question of how we know when an author is writing in a way to deliberately conceal or obscure his teaching. There is, for example, genuine disagreement over whether Descartes’s incorporation of God into his system was a strategic ploy or a genuine expression of his religious convictions. One could ask similar questions of a host of thinkers. Did Maimonides write to confirm or undermine a belief in the primacy of revelation? Did Machiavelli write to advise or usurp the prince? Did Locke’s theory of natural rights, the virtual cornerstone of the American Declaration of Independence, secretly contain a crypto-atheist and materialist tendency? The answers to these questions are obviously not self-evident. It is clear from what Descartes says about himself that he was writing with the example of Galileo’s fate before the Inquisition strongly impressed on his mind, and we know from recent biographies of Locke that he wrote under constant surveillance—so much so that the Master of his Oxford college once referred to him as “the master of taciturnity.”
Critics of Strauss’s practice of “reading between the lines” have latched onto two potential pitfalls or abuses of the method. There is a genuine problem of how to distinguish careful writers who may disguise their teachings from those who are simply muddled. When is a contradiction simply a contradiction and when is it a clue to a paradox? How do we know whether an author is trying to reveal something through a system of elaborately “contrived deceptions” or is simply confused? Strauss himself expressed caution when applying this method. “Reading between the lines,” he wrote, “is strictly prohibited in all cases where it would be less exact than not doing so.” Strauss is clearly being deliberately coy here, but his point is a serious one. There is no a priori way of answering this question, any more than there is an a priori way of knowing when a wink is a wink and not a blink. In other words, look and see for yourself. The proof is in the eating.
There are other critics who believe that Strauss’s manner of reading leads to the perverse conclusion that whenever a writer says X, we should assume that he really means not-X. Thus a learned classicist—who should know better—has written of Strauss’s reading of Plato’s Republic that he makes the text mean exactly “the opposite of what it says.” This is, of course, absurd. The idea that an esoteric communication could be decoded simply by inverting the literal meaning of a text stands in direct violation of the very principles of esotericism. It would be to turn interpretation into a kind of cryptography. What Strauss did show is that the Republic is a book written for several different types of audiences represented by the different characters in the dialogue and that this helps to explain the very different rhetorical stratagems employed throughout the work. Strauss stressed that every text will inhabit a different set of historical circumstances that delimit what can and cannot be said and that every author will express a very different temperament and sensibility regarding his audience. In contrast to any kind of flat-footed literalism, he sought to avoid the reductionism inherent in the view that every book can be read as if it were a journal article written last week.
Perhaps the most revealing (although less often commented upon) aspect of Strauss’s manner of reading is his claim that “the real opinion of an author is not necessarily identical with that which he expresses in the largest number of passages.” In other words, careful reading must be attuned to the singular, the unexpected, and the anomalous. The true intention of an author may be revealed more clearly in what is left half-said or only subtly alluded to than in what is constantly and relentlessly reaffirmed. The result of this manner of reading is to create what a recent French reader of Strauss has referred to as “two regimes of proof.” The one follows the scientific method that regards the true as what is subject to repetition and control, while the other, Strauss’s hermeneutic method, sees the truth in what is singular and nonrepeatable. Truth is to a certain degree “identical with rarity.”
Strauss’s recovery of esoteric writing could not but leave the impression that his own writings were presented in some kind of code to which only the initiate held the key. Of course, if there ever was such a secret teaching, those who know it aren’t saying and those who are saying don’t know. Strauss did write cautiously and reticently, especially with regard to the American regime, but certainly not to conceal some sinister intent. He did not write for the sake of undermining democracy, restoring ancient hierarchies, or advocating policies of imperial expansion—all accusations that have been leveled against him—but for the purpose of protecting the regime from the corrosive blasts of skepticism that philosophy necessarily effects on any body of received opinion. He did not sanction the selective use of lies in public life, as has been asserted, and he certainly nowhere claimed that his own works, much less those of others, were written to convey the opposite of what they said. Strauss wrote as he read, that is, with an awareness that there are multiple kinds of readers with different interests and different needs and that like any good teacher it is necessary to address them in different ways.
There is considerable controversy over the sources of Strauss’s recovery of the esoteric tradition. Was its source in Plato’s artful use of the Socratic dialogue to convey various meanings to different readers without actually speaking in his own name? Was it in Maimonides’s allegorical reading of certain scriptural passages and imagery? Or was it in Nietzsche’s claim that all that is profound loves masks? Strauss himself loved masks and even admitted in a letter to his fellow émigré Karl Lwith that “Nietzsche so charmed me between my 22nd and 30th years that I literally believed everything I understood of him.” Strauss was not a Nietzschean. As he says, Nietzsche’s spell on him was broken after he reached the age of thirty. But he did carry with him something of Nietzsche’s love of unmasking others and his desire to hide behind masks of his own making. No one can claim to have read Strauss seriously without attaining an appreciation for the immense sense of playfulness, of hide and seek, that attends his manner of reading and writing.
An excerpt fromReading Leo StraussPolitics, Philosophy, JudaismSteven B. Smithhttp://www.press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/764028.html
