斯特劳斯：什么是esoteric式读和写？
=============================
发布时间：2008-12-11 12:18
 Following a process demanded by the text, under the instruction of the Maharal, I 
reached a place where I was convinced that I was reading a composition rather than a 
collection. This composition is inaccessible until one goes through the process 
required to reveal it. There can be no doubt that the text reads like a collection, 
as generations of readers have testified. But once I have seen it as a composition, 
I no longer agree with the accepted, orthodox, view. By following the internal logic 
of the text, I have developed a special relationship with the author. I know that 
the text contains a level of meaning which is available only to the few, which is, 
in at least one way, diametrically opposed to common sense. This is part of the 
message being conveyed. The pursuit of wisdom can lead to dangerously unpopular 
opinions. Socrates is the classical example of the life threatening dangers inherent 
in philosophy. Avtalion's warning is even more forceful than the example of Socrates 
because he indicates that the philosopher risks not just his own life but the lives 
of his students as well.
It would remain invisible 
if the reader were not ??í, wise, if he were not able to abstract the dynamic rule 
of the first three Pairs and anticipate its application to the fourth Pair. In this 
sense, the text has become ”interactive.” Only a participant reader could extract 
all of the information included in it and receive the feedback of internal 
verification. At the exact point where the device transcends the limits of the Pair, 
the text transcends the limits of its exoteric content.
The last step of the process is the 
student's self-realization. He recognizes that the author is trying to reach him as 
a unique individual. The reader has already seen that the text must be viewed as 
esoteric, written for the few. At the pinnacle of the pyramid stands just one, the 
reader who has gone this far in his analysis. At the instant when he becomes aware 
of the question ”who is on top”, he knows the answer.
读者被empowered，在阅读中被激活且具有个人独创性了：We could also note that the two ostensibly opposite senses of 
hitpastut, expansion and contraction, which we noted earlier in connection with the 
names of the speakers, are also reflected in the pyramids. However, we have reached 
the point where individual creativity takes over from strict analysis. The reader 
has been empowered. He is no longer the student of an ancient tradition but a 
participant in the process of revelation. With the collapse of the institutions 
associated with the Temple, a new Man emerges, Rabbinic Man.
象雕像内那样的美丽的东西隐含在伟大文本里，只有持续阅读，才可得到它们：In Plato's Banquet, Alcibiades-that outspoken son of outspoken Athens-compares 
Socrates and his speeches to certain sculptures which are very ugly from the 
outside, but within have most beautiful images of things divine. The works of the 
great writers of the past are very beautiful even from without. And yet their 
visible beauty is sheer ugliness, compared with the beauty of those hidden treasures 
which disclose themselves only after very long, never easy, but always pleasant 
work. This always difficult but always pleasant work is, I believe, what 
philosophers had in mind when they recommended education.
