斯特劳斯与尼采海德格尔的同路和分岐
=============================
发布时间：2008-06-12 18:52
 德里达的政治哲学，其与西方哲学的主要连接点，似乎是海德格尔，也就是透过列维纳眼来看到的海德格尔，顺便夹及尼采。与施米特和本雅明的关系，是另一极。与斯特劳斯的区别，主要反映在《友爱的各种政治》《流氓国家》等，但重点在于他和斯特劳斯对于海德格尔和尼采、对于他们对于西方哲学传统的批判后的新立足点的不同看法上。Neil Robertson的《斯特劳斯的柏拉图主义》一文，说出了这一关节：“斯特劳斯在这一点上是跟 承受了海德格尔尔和尼采：看到现代性之核心处的虚无主义危机，这种危机打开了一种性：回到一条在现代性中已被遗忘和失野的原则。而且象海德格尔尔和尼采，对这条原则的恢复，必须回到古人，他们会不现代人的那些假设之歪曲地向我们说出。但是与海德格尔尔和尼采尖锐对立的是，斯特劳斯并不是回到前苏格拉底，而是回到柏拉图和亚里士多德----恰恰是那些对于海德格尔尔和尼采来讲是西方形而上学的建筑师的思想家上，因而[斯特劳斯和这些思想家]是完全是浸染于现代性及其虚无主义。
他看到，现代性的危机并不集中在单个存在者的意义或释义上，但还在于我们的介入到道德和政治生活的能力，而正是这种道德和政治生活，将公民与人的优异性之结构连结起来。那一”原初的”相遇[人作为公民介入到道德与政治生活中]，对于斯特劳斯而言，并不是对作为此在的人而言，而是作为公民的人而言，这是人的一“类”，被一种共享的道德和政治生活所构划。为了恢复这一“原初”之形式，我们不应该转向前苏格拉底的诗人们[尼采]和哲学家们[海德格尔]的诗性沉思，而应转向柏拉图对话之辩证理性主义（He sees that the crisis of modernity is not centrally at the 
level of meaning or significance for the individual exister, but about our capacity 
to engage in a moral and political life that connects citizens to a structure of 
human excellence.(13) The ”originary” encounter is, for Strauss, not for the human 
as dasein, but for the human as citizen, as a certain ”type” structured by a shared 
moral and political life.(14) To recover this form of the ”originary,” one turns not 
to the poetic musings of pre-Socratic poets and philosophers, but to the dialectical 
rationalism of the dialogues of Plato.(15)LEO STRAUSS'S PLATONISM 
Neil Robertson”
”the death of God” or ”the forgetting of Being” as by ”relativism” or ”the 
rejection of natural right”.(6) In short, Strauss characterizes the crisis of 
modernity as primarily moral and political rather than existential. It is more 
fundamentally about the Good than about Being.(7)
 The radical historicism and relativism that belongs to Nietzsche 
and Heidegger is simply the most complete ”conquest” of nature, the final result of 
Machiavelli's transformation of political philosophy. However, the nature to which 
Strauss would have us return is not the ”other” that modernity has conquered, but 
rather ”another conception of nature.”(18) The ”nature” that modernity ”conquered” 
was itself an interpretation posited by modernity.(19)
Modernity originated in the transformation of political philosophy 
effected by Machiavelli, who redirected political philosophy from an essentially 
contemplative or theoretical consideration of political things to the active 
transformation of those things.(16) Strauss describes the change in political 
philosophy effected by Machiavelli in various ways: as a lowering of horizons, as a 
new conception of nature, and as a replacement of human will for nature as the 
source of standards. In all of these characterizations, it is clear that, for 
Strauss, modernity is founded upon the internalizing of the sources of morality 
within human subjectivity, and, as the necessary correlative of this, results in the 
oblivion of nature and total historicization of all moral and political standards. 
(17)
esoteric/exoteric writing.(29) While of course Farabi nowhere states 
the esoteric view that Plato's doctrine of the ideas and the immortality of the soul 
are merely exoteric teachings, this can be ”discovered” by careful reading premised 
on the esoteric/exoteric distinction which Strauss also ”discovers” in Farabi's 
writings.(30) Strauss has uncovered a Plato that perfectly meets the need of 
contemporary humanity to regain contact with a phenomenological nature able to be a 
constitutive source of moral and political life. The difficulties of directly 
refuting Strauss's hermeneutic may be compared to the difficulties of refuting 
psychoanalysis; both point to an object only available to those who practice an art 
which requires as a premise the prior acceptance of the existence of that object-- 
the hidden text or the unconscious mind.(31)
 Each city must have decided among the various alternatives 
and in order to retain the engagement of its citizens must by force and persuasion 
(even to the point of a noble lie), instill the engagement of its citizenry.(44) 
There is an irresolvable conflict between the philosopher, the highest type of man 
who would live in openness to nature as a whole, and the city, which by nature must 
be closed to nature as a whole. The conflict between the philosopher and the city is 
at the heart of Strauss's position, and at the heart of his reading of Plato. For 
Strauss, the Platonic dialogues are not metaphysical but a ”psychological” 
and ”sociological” phenomenology of the relation between the philosopher and the 
city.(45)
The Dialogues are not works of metaphysical theory, but of 
the central problematic of human life: that human excellence in general demands a 
determinate community to sustain the phenomenological activity of moral and 
political life and yet truth and the pursuit of truth shows this given realm of 
moral and political activity to be mere opinion. For Strauss, the city is and must 
remain a ”cave” of opinion, in contrast to philosophy's rise above all particular 
caves into the realm of fundamental problems. Aside from the life of the 
philosopher, there can be no synthesis of truth and life: modernity's nihilistic 
result evidences this.
philosophy is simply the movement between alternatives it can have no 
content which is not opinion. Thus it belongs to Strauss's vision of philosophy that 
all determinate thinking is dogmatic.
德里达对海德格尔哲学中的政治虚无主义批判，焦点在指出其关于人的存在分析太中性，没有给他者留出位置。他跟 从列维纳，认为海德格尔对人的存在分析，是一种概念暴力，是一种西方总体里个人他者无处逃遁的悲剧结尾，从海德格尔格尔哲学那里无法延伸出任何积极的政治意义。德里达总是在海德格尔哲学对西方在场形而上学的摧毁这一点上，来利用后者的。在这里，我们看到，海德格尔使斯特劳斯作出了以上所说的选择，也是海德格尔使德里达转向施米特的决断论和本雅明的暴力论。
斯特劳斯认为，施米特对我们现代社会对霍布斯关于政治的原则认识的遗忘，是我们的政治不够 政治的原因，在那著名的《三十五注》里，斯特劳斯几乎在说，施米特说反了：正是因为现代社会套了霍布斯原则，现代政治才成为金融操作和战争买卖，真正的政治性是不能靠你死我活的政治的激励，而是靠整体的公民道政治生活的重建。德里达是肯定吃不消这种转认的。德里达是在施米特与本雅明关于暴 力和政治决断的看法之冲突上，来看施米特的：政治决断时刻，历史、个人存在和瞬间政治才全部裂现；真正的政治才到来。斯特劳斯和德里达都反对的那个议会式的representation，但施是要恢复整体的道德政治生活秩序，来纠正这一representation之乱，而德里达循列维纳-布朗肖的他者政治学眼光，要以预留他者的位置在未来政治中，来打破和改变这个representation死结。
在《流氓国家》里，只是在批判罗尔斯的万民法和重温霍布斯政治学时，德里达才论及斯特劳斯，其他场合，实际上，两者并没有什么关键点上有什么交锋。我们盯住德里达与施米特和本雅明的关系，可能就够。
