无法用民主来与资本主义作斗争
=============================
发布时间：2010-09-30 00:53
 Today, more than ever, we should here return to Lenin: yes, economy is the key domain, the battle will be decided there, one has to break the spell of the global capitalism but the intervention should be properly political, not economic. Today, when everyone is ”anticapitalist,” up to the Hollywood ”socio-critical” conspiracy movies (from The Enemy of the State to The Insider) in which the enemy are the big corporations with their ruthless pursuit of profit, the signifier ”anticapitalism” has lost its subversive sting. What one should problematize is rather the self-evident opposite of this ”anticapitalism”: the trust in the democratic substance of the honest Americans to break up the conspiracy. this is the hard kernel of today's global capitalist universe, its true Master Signifier: democracy. And are the latest statements of Negri and Hardt not a kind of unexpected confirmation of this Badiou's insight? Following a paradoxical necessity, their very (focusing on) anti-capitalism led them to acknowledge the revolutionary force of capitalism, so that, as they put it recently, one no longer needs to fight capitalism, because capitalism is already in itself generating communist potentials-the ”becoming-communist of capitalism,” to put it in Deleuzian terms...
What we are dealing with here is another version of the Lacanian il n'y a pas de rapport...: if, for Lacan, there is no sexual relationship, then, for Marxism proper, there is no relationship between economy and politics, no ”meta-language” enabling us to grasp from the same neutral standpoint the two levels, although-or, rather, because-these two levels are inextricably intertwined. The ”political” class struggle takes place in the midst of economy (recall that the very last paragraph of Capital III, where the text abruptly stops, tackles the class struggle), while, at the same time, the domain, of economy serves as the key enabling us to decode political struggles. No wonder that the structure of this impossible relationship is that of the Moebius band: first, we have to progress from the political spectacle to its economic infrastructure; then, in the second step, we have to confront the irreducible dimension of the political struggle in the very heart of the economy.
It is this parallax gap that also accounts for the two irreducible dimensions of modernity: ”political” is the logic of domination, of regulative control (”biopolitics,” ”administered world”); ”economic” is the logic of the incessant integration of the surplus, of constant ”deterritorialization.” The resistance to the Political domination refers to the ”supernumerary” element which cannot be accounted for in the terms of the political order but how are we to formulate resistance to the economic logic of reproduction through excess? (And, let us not forget, this excess is strictly correlative to the excess of power itself over its ”official” representative function.) The Leftist dream throughout the XXth century was activated through the subordination of the economic to the political (State control of the process of production). In their last works, Negri and Hardt seem to succumb to the opposite temptation, to shifting the focus on economic struggle, in which one can rely on State.
And therein resides the deadlock of Badiou's politics, after he proclaimed the end of the Jacobinian revolutionary paradigm:-while he is aware that the anti-Statist revolutionary Party politics which aimed at taking over and demolishing the State apparatus is exhausted-he refuses to explore the revolutionary potentials of the ”economic” sphere (since, for him, this sphere belongs to the order of Being and does not contain potential ”evental sites”); for this reason, the only way left is that of a ”pure” political organization which operates outside the constraints of the State and, basically, limits itself to mobilizable declarations... The only way out of this deadlock is to restore to the ”economic” domain the dignity of Truth, the Potential for Events. 
