景观政治的实质就是企图用景观来证明景观，用空洞的象征，来喂饱共同体对于未来的憧憬
=============================
发布时间：2010-04-29 10:09
下面推荐的是一个BBC的关于选举的短节目。http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/console/b00s3gq9
这是要请厉害的记者和新闻编辑以他们自己的眼光来看各大报纸对于某些选举主题-问题的看法，请念台词出色的演员将原文里的意向戏剧性地发挥出来。
这样的节目表明：新闻可以成为政治的自转，政治自转，与我们的参与没关系了，政治也不在乎是否有我们在其中了。政治是一大堆自己在那里报道、评述和涂抹的东西，与个人与主体没有关系了；或者说个人或主体只有先成为其看客，由专家帮助，才能理解这一大堆东西。理解这一大堆东西于是不是比谁认识透彻，而是比谁用了更高版本的信息收集媒体，比如这个节目就是一个更高的收集媒体。
可怕者，只是这个媒体它是自足的，它说得够好的了，成为壮丽的景观，你插不进嘴去，它越来越使我们插不进嘴，那最后，我们作为政治主体会变成什么呢？我们就会成为阿甘本说的奥斯维辛里的musulman：只残留着人身上的与动物共享的一些动物性，退守到一些怪癖的身体动作来合理化地维护自己的主体空壳。他的态度：你们去说好了，这与我何干；你要我怎样？我不早就与你说了么，你要咋样就咋样。或者，我们不想进入政治，只想看作为景观的政治，像看一场漂亮的连续的焰火。今天的政治因此比希特勒和斯大林的集权纳粹政治炫丽几百倍。
另一方面说，景观-民主政治和专制集权政府也同样热衷于用景观政治来代替激进民主，也就是说，用景观来代替representation来代替最基本的社会参与。本来应该是去体验自己的政治生活的火热，生活到其中，结果自己就先做了看客，被景观本身迷住了。景观政治的实质就是企图用景观来证明景观，用空洞的象征，来喂饱共同体对于未来的憧憬。看客于是不知道那未来是埋在自己身上，而是像飞蛾一样扑到那荧光的景观身上了。正如德波尔-阿甘本所指出，人被这样粘到了景观身上，这一幕我们在夏天看破到过：粘苍蝇的纸上黑压压的一片，也可以是那政治主体和主权个人。
出路在哪里呢？阿甘本在《德波尔＜景观景观社会＞侧评》中说，在景观中，我们身上的那种the Common被剥夺掉了，我们的政治里没有了那一the Common，只剩下了景观。我们在景观中遭遇的，恰恰是我们的语言被倒错着来用了：它来说我们，我们用不着去说它了。阿甘本认为，也正是这一原因，景观的暴力虽然这么大，这景观本身里也是包含着某种积极的可能性的，而我们的责任是是动用这一可能性来战胜景观。这一海德格尔式的景观救赎，是要我们用语言去占用语言的景观？他要我们去写作：将我们的共在的独特界线展示出来（南西），时时修改和调整我们自己与共同体的关系（巴塔耶），不断撤销（拆除/拆散）我们的社会、经济、=技术和机构劳动（工作）（布朗肖），走出共同体以便走出景观（阿甘本），别无选择！走出景观，走出共同体，使我们的政治行动成为一次次写作行动！
阿甘本《德波尔＜景观景观社会＞侧评》：All appearances notwithstanding, the spectacular-democratic world organization that is thus emerging actually runs the risk of being the worst tyranny that ever materialized in the history of humanity, against which resistance and dissent will be practically more and more difficult - and all the more so in that it is increasingly clear that such an organization will have the task of managing the survival of humanity in an uninhahitable world. One cannot be sure, however, that the spectacle’s attempt to maintain control over the process it contributed to putting in motion in the first place will actually succeed. The state of the spectacle, after all, is still a state that bases itself (as Badiou has shown every state to base itself) not on social bonds, of which it purportedly is the expression, but rather on their dissolution, which it forbids. In the final analysis, the state can recognize any claim for identity - even that of a state identity within itself (and in our time, the history of the relations between the state and terrorism is an eloquent confirmation of this fact). But what the state cannot tolerate in any way is that singularities form a community without claiming an identity, that human beings co-belong without a representable condition of belonging (being Italian, working-class, Catholic, terrorist, etc.). And yet, the state of the spectacle inasmuch as it empties and nullifies every real identity, and substitutes the publie and public opinion for the people and the general will - is precisely what produces massively from within itself singularities that are no longer characterized either by any social identity or by any real condition of belonging: singularities that are truly whatever singularities. It is clear that the society of the spectacle is also one in which all social identities have dissolved and in which everything that for centuries represented the splendor and misery of the generations succeeding themselves on Earth has by now lost all its significance. The different identities that have marked the tragicomedy of universal history are exposed and gathered with a phantasmagorical vacuity in the global petite bourgeoisie - a petite bourgeoisie that constitutes the form in which the spectacle has realized parodistically the Marxian project of a classless society.
The Eastern governments allowed the Leninist party to fall so that the integrated spectacle could be completely realized in their countries. In the same way, the West had already renounced a while ago the balance of powers as well as real freedom of thought and communication in the name of the electoral machine of majority vote and of media control over public opinion - both of which had developed within the totalitarian modern states
What the entire world was watching live on television, thinking it was the real truth, was in reality the absolute nontruth; and, although the falsification appeared to be sometimes quite obvious, it was nevertheless legitimized as true by the media’s world system, so that it would be clear that the true was, by now, nothing more than a moment within the necessary movement of the false. In this way, truth and falsity became indistinguishable from each other and the spectacle legitimized itself solely through the spectacle.
Timisoara is, in this sense, the Auschwitz of the age of the spectacle: and in the same way in which it has been said that after Auschwitz it is impossible to write and think as before, after Timisoara it will be no longer possible to watch television in the same way.
This means that an integrated Marxian analysis should take into consideration the fact that capitalism (or whatever other name we might want to give to the process dominating world history today) not only aimed at the expropriation of productive activity, but also, and above all, at the alienation of language itself, of the linguistic and communicative nature of human beings, of that logos in which Heraclitus identifies the Common. The extreme form of the expropriation of the Common is the spectacle, in other words, the politics in which we live. But this also means that what we encounter in the spectacle is our very linguistic nature inverted. For this reason (precisely because what is being expropriated is the possibility itself of a common good), the spectacle’s violence is so destructive; but, for the same reason, the spectacle still contains something like a positive possibility - and it is our task to use this possibility against it.
