朗西埃:审美的政治;为什么做艺术是在做政治?为什么艺术是政治的?
=============================
发布时间：2006-12-25 13:51
 It is political insofar as it frames not only works or monuments , but also a specific space-time sensorium , as this sensorium defines ways of being together or being apart , of being inside or outside , in front of or in the middle of , etc. It is political as its own practices shape forms of visibility that reframe the way in which practices , manners of being and modes of feeling and saying are interwoven in a commonsense , which means a ”sense of the common” embodied in a common sensorium .
It does so because politics itself is not the exercise of power or struggle for power. Politics is first of all the configuration of a space as political , the framing of a specific sphere of experience , the setting of objects posed as ”common” and of subjects to whom the capacity is recognized to designate these objects and discuss about them. Politics first is the conflict about the very existence of that sphere of experience , the reality of those common objects and the capacity of those subjects. A well known aristotelian sentence says that human beings are political because they own the power of speech that puts into common the issues of justice and injustice while animals only have voice to express pleasure or pain. It could seem to follow from this that politics is the public discussion on matters of justice among speaking people who are all able to do it. But there is a preliminary matter of justice : How do you recognize that the person who is mouthing a voice in front of you is discussing matters of justice rather than expressing his or her private pain ? Politics is in fact about that preliminary question : who has the power to decide about this? In another well-known statement Plato says that artisans have no time to be elsewhere outside of their work . Obviously this ”lack of time” is not an empirical matter , it is the mere naturalization of a symbolical separation . Politics precisely begins when they who have ”no time” to do anything else than their work take that time that they have not in order to make themselves visible as sharing in a common world and prove that their mouth indeed emits common speech instead of merely voicing pleasure or pain. That distribution and re-distribution of times and spaces , places and identities , that way of framing and re-framing the visible and the invisible , of telling speech from noise and so on , is what I call the partition of the sensible . Politics consist in reconfigurating the partition of the sensible , in bringing on the stage new objects and subjects , in making visible that which was not visible, audible as speaking beings they who where merely heard as noisy animals . To the extent that it sets up such scenes of dissensus , politics can be characterized as an ”aesthetic” activity , in a way that has nothing to do with that adornment of power that Benjamin called ”aestheticization of politics” .
The issue ”aesthetics and politics” can thus be rephrased as follows: there is an ”aesthetics of politics” in the sense that I tried to explain. Correspondingly, there is a ”politics of aesthetics”. This means that the artistic practices take part in the partition of the perceptible insofar as they suspend the ordinary coordinates of sensory experience and reframe the network of relationships between spaces and times, subjects and objects ,the common and the singular. There is not always politics, though there always are forms of power . Nor is there always art, though there always are poetry , painting , music , theatre, dance , sculpture and so on . Politics and art are not two separate and permanent realities about which one should ask whether they have to be connected or not . Each of them is a conditional reality , that exists or not according to a specific partition of the sensible . Plato's Republic is a good case in point. It is sometimes misunderstood as the ”political” proscription of art. But politics itself is withdrawn by the platonician gesture . The same partition of the sensible withdraws a political stage by denying to the artisans any time for doing something else than their own job and an ”artistic” stage by closing the theater where the poet and the actors would embody another personality than their own . The same configuration of the space-time of the community withdraws for both of them the possibility of making two things at once . It puts the artisan out of politics and the mimetician out of the city . Democracy and the theatre are two forms of the same partition of the sensible , two forms of heterogeneity , that are dismissed at the same time to frame the republic as the ”organic life” of the community .
So the ”aesthetical knot” is always tied up before you can identify art or politics . Bojana Cvejic's blog | login or register to post comments | 6890 reads
