机器（技术）对我们的作用是奉迎
=============================
发布时间：2010-10-01 09:10
 我们与机器（技术、媒体）的关系，是一种性关系。我们对它发生了兴趣，想要投入它，它就看准了我们的这一欲望，滋事生出许多的关节或功能，要它怎么样，它就怎么样，好象是百依百顺，来一一满足我们的欲望的增生。表面上是人在使用媒体，实际上，这时人就成了这个机器世界的性器官，我们就像植物世界里的蜜蜂那样无端地忙碌，去催孕和生形，自己却以为是在利用媒体。机器通过征服人的人的愿望和欲望，也就是说通过提供财富给人，来对回报人对它的爱。
奉迎是它的本质。这种奉迎是人的自我欺骗。人因为自恋，而相信作为其四肢延展的机器，是另外的东西，像爱上水中的自己的倒影那样地爱上了机器（技术、媒体）。我们被它弄得神魂颠倒。后果是，媒体使我们更渴着得于新媒体。我们是饮鸠止渴：
A-Eighteenth-century man got an extension of himself in the form of the spinning machine that Yeats endows with its full sexual significance. Woman, herself, is thus seen as a technological extension of man's being.
B-Margaret Mead described in Time magazine (September 4, 1954): ”There are too many complaints about society having to move too fast to keep up with the machine. There is great advantage in moving fast if you move completely, if social, educational, and recreational changes keep pace. You must change the whole pattern at once and the whole group together梐nd the people themselves must decide to move.”
Margaret Mead is thinking here of change as uniform speedup of motion or a uniform hotting-up of temperatures in backward societies. We are certainly coming within conceivable range of a world automatically controlled to the point where we could say, ”Six hours less radio in Indonesia next week or there will be a great falling off in literary attention.” Or, ”We can ! program twenty more hours of TV in South Africa next week to cool down the tribal temperature raised by radio last week.” Whole cultures could now be programmed to keep their emotional climate stable in the same way that we have begun to know something about maintaining equilibrium in the commercial economies of the world
In the merely personal and private sphere we are often
reminded of how changes of tone and attitude are demanded of different times and seasons in order to keep situations in hand. British clubmen, for the sake of companionship and amiability, have long excluded the hot topics of religion and politics from mention inside the highly participational club. In the same vein, W. H. Auden wrote, ”... this season the man of goodwill will wear his heart up his sleeve, not on it. ... the honest manly style is today suited only to Iago” (Introduction to John Betjeman's Slick But Not Streamlined). In the Renaissance, as print technology hotted up the social milieu to a very high point, the gentleman and the courtier (Hamlet桵ercutio style) adopted, in contrast, the casual and cool nonchalance of the playful and superior being. The Iago allusion of Auden reminds us that Iago was the alter ego and assistant of the intensely earnest and very non-nonchalant General Othello. In imitation of the earnest and forthright general, Iago hotted up his own image and wore his heart on his sleeve, until General Othello read him loud and clear as ”honest Iago,” a man after his own grimly earnest heart.
Throughout The City in History, Lewis Mumford favors die
C-Man becomes, as it were, the sex organs of the machine world, as the bee of the plant world, enabling it to fecundate and to evolve ever new forms. The machine world reciprocates man's love by expediting his wishes and desires, namely, in providing him with wealth. One of the merits of motivation research has been the revelation of man's sex relation to the motorcar.
Socially, it is the accumulation of group pressures and irritations that prompt invention and innovation as counter-irritants. War and the fear of war have always been considered the main incentives to technological extension of our bodies. Indeed, Lewis Mumford, in his The City in History, considers the walled city itself an extension of our skins, as much as housing and clothing. More even than the preparation for war, the aftermath of invasion is a rich technological period; because the subject culture has to adjust all its sense ratios to accommodate the impact of the invading culture. It is from such intensive hybrid exchange and strife of ideas and forms that the greatest social energies are released, and from which arise the greatest technologies. Buckminster Fuller estimates that since 1910 the governments of the world have spent 31/2 trillion dollars on airplanes. That is 62 times the existing gold supply of the world.
The principle of numbness comes into play with electric technology, as with any other. We have to numb our central nervous system when it is extended and exposed, or we will die（麦克卢汉，《理解媒体》，第四章）。
