比尔盖茨成了我们时代最伟大的人道主义救援者，莫多克保证了我们的新闻自由？
=============================
发布时间：2010-02-01 11:06
 宗教死了，但我们仍然需要那个Big Other，它就是新到来的人类生活将引发自然灾难。这是一种恐惧生态学，它将我们放到前所未有的想行动而更不敢行动的境地。齐泽克举例：一个人认为他自己是一颗谷粒，经心理分析师帮助，他敢出门了，但一看见一只鸡，马上又回病房。分析师说，你知道他只是一只鸡，你不是谷粒。病人答说，谁知道这只鸡知不知道我不是一颗谷粒呢！
我们有无数的肤浅的选择可以作出，但就是作不出那一真正改变我们的生活和世界的那一行动。为什么作不出？齐泽克回答：那是因为我们不再相信我们所知道的东西。我们认为常识也不可靠了。我们知道得越多，行动就越困难。这刚好被主导者利用。政治行动变成了政治消费。比尔盖茨成了我们时代最伟大的人道主义救援者，莫多克保证了我们的新闻自由？
这时，齐泽克说，巴迪厄的话就有了份量：共产主义假设仍是我们作出行动的保障，是不二的选择（否则你只能像们上帝那样，去害怕那个Big Other也就是生态灾难来自己的行为，永远踟蹰不前）：
It is
this reference to “commons” which justifies the resuscitation of the notion of Communism - or, to quote Alain
Badiou:
The communist hypothesis remains the good one, I do not see any other. If we have to abandon this hypothesis,
then it is no longer worth doing anything at all in the field of collective action. Without the horizon of communism,
without this Idea, there is nothing in the historical and political becoming of any interest to a philosopher.
Let everyone bother about his own affairs, and let us stop talking about it. In this case, the rat-man is right, as is,
by the way, the case with some ex-communists who are either avid of their rents or who lost courage. However,
to hold on to the Idea, to the existence of this hypothesis, does not mean that we should retain its first form of
presentation which was centered on property and State. In fact, what is imposed on us as a task, even as a philosophical
obligation, is to help a new mode of existence of the hypothesis to deploy itself.
So where do we stand today with regard to communism? The first step is to admit that the solution is not to
limit the market and private property by direct interventions of the State and state ownership. The domain of
State itself is also in its own way “private”: private in the precise Kantian sense of the “private use of Reason”
in State administrative and ideological apparatuses:
The public use of one’s reason must always be free, and it alone can bring about enlightenment among men.
The private use of one’s reason, on the other hand, may often be very narrowly restricted without particularly
hindering the progress of enlightenment. By public use of one’s reason I understand the use which a person
makes of it as a scholar before the reading public. Private use I call that which one may make of it in a particular
civil post or office which is entrusted to him.
What one should add here, moving beyond Kant, is that there is a privileged social group which, on account
of its lacking a determinate place in the “private” order of social hierarchy, directly stands for universality: it
is only the reference to those Excluded, to those who dwell in the blanks of the State space, that enables true
universality. There is nothing more “private” than a State community which perceives the Excluded as a threat
and worries how to keep the Excluded at a proper distance. In other words, in the series of the four antagonisms,
the one between the Included and the Excluded is the crucial one, the point of reference for the others; without
it, all others lose their subversive edge: ecology turns into a “problem of sustainable development,” intellectual
property into a “complex legal challenge,” biogenetics into an “ethical” issue. One can sincerely fight for
ecology, defend a broader notion of intellectual property, oppose the copyrighting of genes, while not questioning
the antagonism between the Included and the Excluded - even more, one can even formulate some of these
struggles in the terms of the Included threatened by the polluting Excluded. In this way, we get no true universality,
only “private” concerns in the Kantian sense of the term. Corporations like Whole Foods and Starbucks
continue to enjoy favor among liberals even though they both engage in anti-union activities; the trick is that
they sell products that contain the claim of being politically progressive acts in and of themselves. One buys
coffee made with beans bought at above fair-market value, one drives a hybrid vehicle, one buys from companies
that provide good benefits for their customers (according to the corporation’s own standards), etc. Political
action and consumption become fully merged. In short, without the antagonism between the Included and
the Excluded, we may well find ourselves in a world in which Bill Gates is the greatest humanitarian fighting
against poverty and diseases, and Rupert Murdoch the greatest environmentalist mobilizing hundreds of millions
through his media empire.
