波德莱尔：《现代画家》：艺术家
=============================
发布时间：2010-12-31 23:21
 III. AN ARTIST, MAN OF THE WORLD, MAN OF CROWDS, AND
CHILD
Today I want to talk to my readers about a singular man, whose originality is
so powerful and clear-cut that it is self-sufficing, and does not bother to look
for approval. None of his drawings is signed, if by signature we mean the few
letters, which can be so easily forged, that compose a name, and that so
many other artists grandly inscribe at the bottom of their most carefree
sketches. But all his works are signed with his dazzling soul, and art-lovers
who have seen and liked them will recognize them easily from the
description I propose to give of them. M. C. G. loves mixing with the crowds
loves being incognito, and carries his originality to the point of modesty. M.
Thackeray, who, as is well known, is very interested in all things to do with
art, and who draws the illustrations for his own novels, one day spoke of M.
G. in a London review, much to the irritation of the latter who regarded the
matter as an outrage to his modesty. And again quite recently, when he heard
that I was proposing to make an assessment of his mind and talent, he begged
me, in a most peremptory manner, to suppress his name, and to discuss his
works only as though they were the works of some anonymous person. I will
humbly obey this odd request. The reader and I will proceed as though M. G.
did not exist, and we will discuss his drawings and his water-colours. for
which he professes a patrician's disdain, in the same way as would a group of
scholars faced with the task of assessing the importance of a number of
precious historical documents which chance has brought to light, and the
author of which must for ever remain unknown. And even to reassure my
conscience completely, let my readers assume that all the things I have to say
about the artist's nature, so strangely and mysteriously dazzling, have been
more or less accurately suggested by the works in question; pure poetic
hypothesis, conjecture, or imaginative reconstructions.
M. G. is an old man. Jean-Jacques began writing, so they say, at the age of
forty-two. Perhaps it was at about that age that M. G., obsessed by the world
of images that filled his mind, plucked up courage to cast ink and colours on
to a sheet of white paper. To be honest, he drew like a barbarian, like a child,
angrily chiding his clumsy fingers and his disobedient tool. I have seen a
large number of these early scribblings, and I admit that most of the people
who know what they are talking about, or who claim to, could, without
shame, have failed to discern the latent genius that dwelt in these obscure
beginnings. Today, M. G., who has discovered unaided all the little tricks of
the trade, and who has taught himself, without help or advice, has become a
powerful master in his own way; of his early artlessness he has retained only
what was needed to add an unexpected spice to his abundant gift. When he
happens upon one of these efforts of his early manner, he tears it up or burns
it, with a most amusing show of shame and indignation.
For ten whole years I wanted to make the acquaintance of M. G., who is by
nature a great traveller and very cosmopolitan. I knew that he had for a long
time been working for an English illustrated paper and that in it had appeared
engravings from his travel sketches (Spain, Turkey, the Crimea). Since then I
have seen a considerable mass of these on-the-spot drawings from life, and I
have thus been able to 'read' a detailed and daily account, infinitely preferable
to any other, of the Crimean campaign. The same paper had also published
(without signature, as before) a large quantity of compositions by this artist
from the new ballets and operas. When at last I ran him to ground I saw at
once that I was not dealing exactly with an artist but rather with a man of the
world. In this context, pray interpret the word 'artist' in a very narrow sense,
and the expression 'man of the world' in a very broad one. By 'man of the
world', I mean a man of the whole world, a man who understands the world
and the mysterious and legitimate reasons behind all its customs; by 'artist', I
mean a specialist, a man tied to his palette like a serf to the soil. M. G. does
not like being called an artist. Is he not justified to a small extent? He takes
an interest in everything the world over, he wants to know, understand,
assess everything that happens on the surface of our spheroid. The artist
moves little, or even not at all, in intellectual and political circles. If he lives
in the Breda quarter he knows nothing of what goes on in the Faubourg
Saint-Germain. With two or three exceptions, which it is unnecessary to
name, the majority of artists are, let us face it, very skilled brutes, mere
manual laborers, village pub-talkers with the minds of country bumpkins.
Their talk; inevitably enclosed within very narrow limits, quickly becomes a
bore to the man of the world, to the spiritual citizen of the universe.
Thus to begin to understand M. G., the first thing to note is this. that curiosity
may be considered the starting point of his genius.
Do you remember a picture (for indeed it is a picture!) written by the most
powerful pen of this age and entitled The Man of the Crowd? Sitting in a
cafe, and looking through the shop window, a convalescent is enjoying the
sight of the passing crowd, and identifying himself in thought with all the
thoughts that are moving around him. He has only recently come back from
the shades of death and breathes in with delight all the spores and odours of
life; as he has been on the point of forgetting everything, he remembers and
passionately wants to remember everything. In the end he rushes out into the
crowd in search of a man unknown to him whose face, which he had caught
sight of, had in a flash fascinated him. Curiosity had become a compelling,
irresistible passion.
Now imagine an artist perpetually in the spiritual condition of the
convalescent, and you will have the key to the character of M. G.
But convalescence is like a return to childhood. The convalescent, like the
child, enjoys to the highest degree the faculty of taking a lively interest in
things, even the most trivial in appearance. Let us hark back, if we can, by a
retrospective effort of our imaginations, to our youngest, our morning
impressions, and we shall recognize that they were remarkably akin to the
vividly coloured impressions that we received later on after a physical illness,
provided that illness left our spiritual faculties pure and unimpaired. The
child sees everything as a novelty; the child is always 'drunk'. Nothing is
more like what we call inspiration than the joy the child feels in drinking in
shape and colour. I will venture to go even further and declare that
inspiration has some connection with congestion, that every sublime thought
is accompanied by a more or less vigorous nervous impulse that reverberates
in the cerebral cortex. The man of genius has strong nerves; those of the child
are weak. In the one, reason has assumed an important role; in the other,
sensibility occupies almost the whole being. But genius is no more than
childhood recaptured at will, childhood equipped now with man's physical
means to express itself, and with the analytical mind that enables it to bring
order into the sum of experience, involuntarily amassed. To this deep and
joyful curiosity must be attributed that stare, animal-like in its ecstasy, which
all children have when confronted with something new, whatever it may be,
face or landscape, light, gilding, colours, watered silk, enchantment of
beauty, enhanced by the arts of dress. A friend of mine was telling me one
day how, as a small boy, he used to be present when his father was dressing,
and how he had always been filled with astonishment, mixed with delight, as
he looked at the arm muscle, the colour tones of the skin tinged with rose and
yellow, and the bluish network of the veins. The picture of the external world
was already beginning to fill him with respect, and to take possession of his
brain. Already the shape of things obsessed and possessed him. A precocious
fate was showing the tip of its nose. His damnation was settled. Need I say
that, today, the child is a famous painter.
I was asking you just now to think of M. G. as an eternal convalescent; to
complete your idea of him, think of him also as a man-child, as a man
possessing at every moment the genius of childhood, in other words a genius
for whom no edge of life is blunted.
I told you that I was unwilling to call him a pure artist, and that he himself
rejected this title, with a modesty tinged with aristocratic restraint. I would
willingly call him a dandy, and for that I would have a sheaf of good reasons;
for the word 'dandy' implies a quintessence of character and a subtle understanding
of all the moral mechanisms of this world; but, from another aspect,
the dandy aspires to cold detachment, and it is in this way that M. G, who is
dominated, if ever anyone was, by an insatiable passion, that of seeing and
feeling, parts company trenchantly with dandyism. Anabam amare, said St
Augustine. 'I love passion, passionately,' M. G. might willingly echo. The
dandy is blase, or affects to be, as a matter of policy and class attitude. M. G.
hates blase people. Sophisticated minds will understand me when I say that
he possesses that difficult art of being sincere without being ridiculous. I
would confer on him the title of philosopher, to which he has a right for more
than one reason; but his excessive love of visible, tangible things, in their
most plastic form, inspires him with a certain dislike of those things that go
to make up the intangible kingdom of the metaphysical. Let us therefore
reduce him to the status of the pure pictorial moralist, like La Bruyere.
The crowd is his domain, just as the air is the bird's, and water that of the
fish. His passion and his profession is to merge with the crowd. For the
perfect idler, for the passionate ob-server it becomes an immense source of
enjoyment to establish his dwelling in the throng, in the ebb and flow, the
bustle, the fleeting and the infinite. To be away from home and yet to feel at
home anywhere; to see the world, to be at the very centre of the world, and
yet to be unseen of the world, such are some of the minor pleasures of those
independent, intense and impartial spirits, who do not lend themselves easily
to linguistic definitions. The observer is a prince enjoying his incognito
wherever he goes. The lover of life makes the whole world into his family,
just as the lover of the fair sex creates his from all the lovely women he has
found, from those that could be found, and those who arc impossible to find,
just as the picture-lover lives in an enchanted world of dreams painted on
canvas. Thus the lover of universal life moves into the crowd as though into
an enormous reservoir of electricity. He, the lover of life, may also be
compared to a mirror as vast as this crowd: to a kaleidoscope endowed with
consciousness, which with every one of its movements presents a pattern of
life, in all its multiplicity, and the flowing grace of all the elements that go to
compose life. It is an ego athirst for the non-ego, and reflecting it at every
moment in energies more vivid than life itself, always inconstant and fleeting.
'Any man', M. G. once said, in one of those talks he rendered memorable by
the intensity of his gaze, and by his eloquence of gesture, 'any man who is
not weighed down with a sorrow so searching as to touch all his faculties,
and who is bored in the midst of the crowd, is a fool! A fool ! and I despise
him!'
When, as he wakes up, M. G. opens his eyes and sees the beating vibrantly at
his window-panes, he says to himself with remorse and regret: 'What an
imperative command! What a fanfare of light! Light everywhere for several
hours past! Light I have lost in sleep ! and endless numbers of things bathed
in light that I could have seen and have failed to!' And off he goes ! And he
watches the flow of life move by, majestic and dazzling. He admires the
eternal beauty and the astonishing harmony of life in the capital cities, a
harmony so providentially maintained in the tumult of human liberty. He
gazes at the landscape of the great city, landscapes of stone, now swathed in
the mist, now struck in full face by the sun. He enjoys handsome equipages,
proud horses, the spit and polish of the grooms, the skilful handling by the
page boys, the smooth rhythmical gait of the women, the beauty of the
children, full of the joy of life and proud as peacocks of their pretty clothes;
in short, life universal. If in a shift of fashion, the cut of a dress has been
slightly modified, if clusters of ribbons and curls have been dethroned by
rosettes, if bonnets have widened and chignons have come down a little on
the nape of the neck, if waist-lines have been raised and skirts become fuller,
you may be sure that from a long way off his eagle's eye will have detected
it. A regiment marches by, maybe on its way to the ends of the earth, filling
the air of the boulevard with its martial airs, as light and lively as hope; and
sure enough M. G. has already seen, inspected and analysed the weapons and
the bearing of this whole body of troops. Harness, highlights, bands,
determined mien, heavy and grim mustachios, all these details flood
chaotically into him; and within a few minutes the poem that comes with it
all is virtually composed. And then his soul will vibrate with the soul of the
regiment, marching as though it were one living creature, proud image of joy
and discipline!
But evening comes. The witching hour, the uncertain light, when the sky
draws its curtains and the city lights go on. The gaslight stands out on the
purple background of the setting sun. Honest men or crooked customers, wise
or irresponsible, all are saying to themselves: 'The day is clone at last!' Good
men and bad turn their thoughts to pleasure, and each hurries to his favourite
haunt to drink the cup of oblivion. M G. will be the last to leave any place
where the departing glories of daylight linger, where poetry echoes, life
pulsates, music sounds; any place where a human passion offers a subject to
his eye where natural man and conventional man reveal themselves in
strange beauty, where the rays of the dying sun pay on the fleeting pleasure
of the 'depraved animal!' 'Well, there, to be sure, is a day well filled,'
murmurs to himself a type of reader well-known to all of us; 'each one of us
has surely enough genius to fill it in the same way.' No! few men have the
gift of seeing; fewer still have the power to express themselves. And now,
whilst others are sleeping, this man is leaning over his table, his steady gaze
on a sheet of paper, exactly the same gaze as he directed just now at the
things about him, brandishing his pencil, his pen, his brush, splashing water
from the glass up to the ceiling, wiping his pen on his shirt, hurried, vigorous,
active, as though he was afraid the images might escape him, quarrelsome
though alone, and driving himself relentlessly on. And things seen are born
again on the paper, natural and more than natural, beautiful and better than
beautiful, strange and endowed with an enthusiastic life, like the soul of their
creator. The weird pageant has been distilled from nature. All the materials,
stored higgledy-piggledy by memory, are classified, ordered, harmonized,
and undergo that deliberate idealization, which is the product of a childlike
perceptiveness, in other words a perceptiveness that is acute and magical by
its very ingenuousness.
