波德莱尔：《现代画家》：现代性
=============================
发布时间：2010-12-31 23:18
 IV. MODERNITY
And so, walking or quickening his pace, he goes his way, for ever in search.
In search of what? We may rest assured that this man, such as I have
described him, this solitary mortal endowed with an active imagination,
always roaming the great desert of men, has a nobler aim than that of the
pure idler, a more general aim, other than the fleeting pleasure of
circumstance. He is looking for that indefinable something we may be
allowed to call 'modernity', for want of a better term to express the idea in
question. The aim for him is to extract from fashion the poetry that resides in
its historical envelope, to distil the eternal from the transitory. If we cast our
eye over our exhibitions of modern pictures, we shall be struck by the
general tendency of our artists to clothe all manner of subjects in the dress of
the past. Almost all of them use the fashions and the furnishings of the
Renaissance, as David used Roman fashions and furnishings, but there is this
difference, that David, having chosen subjects peculiarly Greek or Roman,
could not do otherwise than present them in the style of antiquity, whereas
the painters of today, choosing, as they do, subjects of a general nature,
applicable to all ages, will insist on dressing them up in the fashion of the
Middle Ages, of the Renaissance, or of the East. This is evidently sheer
laziness; for it is much more convenient to state roundly that everything is
hopelessly ugly in the dress of a period than to apply oneself to the task of
extracting the mysterious beauty that may be hidden there, however small or
light it may be. Modernity is the transient, the fleeting, the contingent; it is
one half of art, the other being the-eternal and the immovable. There was a
form of modernity for every painter of the past; the majority of the fine
portraits that remain to us from former times arc clothed in the dress of their
own day. They are perfectly harmonious works because the dress, the
hairstyle, and even the gesture, the expression and the smile (each age has its
carriage, its expression and its smile) form a whole, full of vitality. You have
no right to despise this transitory fleeting element, the metamorphoses of
which arc so frequent, nor to dispense with it. If you do, you inevitably fall
into the emptiness of an abstract and indefinable beauty, like that of the One
and only woman of the time before the Fall. If for the dress of the day, which
is necessarily right, you substitute another, you are guilty of a piece of
nonsense that only a fancy-dress ball imposed by fashion can excuse. Thus
the goddesses, the nymphs, and sultanas of the eighteenth century are
portraits in the spirit of their day.
No doubt it is an excellent discipline to study the old masters, in order to
learn how to paint, but it can be no more than a superfluous exercise if your
aim is to understand the beauty of the present day. The draperies of Rubens
or Veronese will not teach you how to paint watered silk d ['antique, or satin
a la reine, or any other fabric produced by our mills, supported by a swaying
crinoline, or petticoats of starched muslin. The texture and grain are not the
same as in the fabrics of old Venice, or those worn at the court of Catherine.
We may add that the cut of the skirt and bodice is absolutely different, that
the pleats are arranged into a new pattern, and finally that the gesture and
carriage of the woman of today give her dress a vitality and a character that
are not those of the woman of former ages. In short, in order that any form of
modernity may be worthy of becoming antiquity, the mysterious beauty that
human life unintentionally puts into it must have been extracted from it. It is
this task that M. G. particularly addresses himself to.
I have said that every age has its own carriage, its expression, its gestures.
This proposition may be easily verified in a large portrait gallery (the one at
Versailles, for example). But it can be yet further extended. In a unity we call
a nation, the professions, the social classes, the successive centuries,
introduce variety not only in gestures and manners, but also in the general
outlines of faces. Such and such a nose, mouth, forehead, will be standard for
a given interval of time, the length of which I shall not claim to determine
here, but which may certainly be a matter of calculation. Such ideas are not
familiar enough to portrait painters; and the great weakness of M. Ingres, in
particular, is the desire to impose on every type that sits for him a more or
less complete process of improvement, in other words a despotic perfecting
process, borrowed from the store of classical ideas.
In a matter such as this, a priori reasoning would be easy and even
legitimate. The perpetual correlation between what is called the soul and
what is called the body is a quite satisfactory explanation of how what is
material or emanates from the spiritual reflects and will always reflect the
spiritual force it derives from. If a painter, patient and scrupulous but with
only inferior imaginative power, were commissioned to paint a courtesan of
today, and, for this purpose, were to get his inspiration (to use the hallowed
term) from a courtesan by Titian or Raphael, the odds are that his work
would be fraudulent, ambiguous, and difficult to understand. The study of a
masterpiece of that date and of that kind will not teach him the carriage, the
gaze, the come-hitherishness, or the living representation of one of these
creatures that the dictionary of fashion has, in rapid succession, pigeonholed
under the coarse or light-hearted rubric of unchaste, kept women, Lorettes.
The same remark applies precisely to the study of the soldier, the dandy, and
even animals, dogs or horses, and of all things that go to make up the
external life of an age. Woe betide the man who goes to antiquity for the
study of anything other than ideal art, logic and general method! By
immersing, himself too deeply in it, he will no longer have the present in his
minds eye; he throws away the value and the privileges afforded by
circumstance; for nearly all our originality comes from the stamp that t~
impresses upon our sensibility. The reader will readily understand that I could
easily verify my assertions from innumerable objects other than women.
What would you say, for example, of a marine painter (I take an extreme
case) who, having to represent the sober and elegant beauty of a modern
vessel, were to tire out his eyes in the study of the overloaded, twisted
shapes, the monumental stern, of ships of bygone ages, and the complex sails
and rigging of the sixteenth century? And what would you think of an artist
you had commissioned to do the portrait of a thorough-bred, celebrated in the
solemn annals of the turf, if he were to restrict his studies to museums, if he
were to content himself with looking at equine studies of the past in the
picture galleries, in Van Dyck, Bourguignon, or Van der Meulen?
M.G., guided by nature, tyrannized over by circumstance, has followed a
quite different path. He began by looking at life, and only later did he
contrive to learn how to express life. The result has been a striking
originality, in which whatever traces of untutored simplicity may still remain
take on the appearance of an additional proof of obedience to the impression,
of a flattery of truth. For most of us, especially for businessmen, in whose
eyes nature does not exist, unless it be in its strict utility relationship with
their business interests, the fantastic reality of life becomes strangely blunted.
M.G. registers it constantly; his memory and his eyes are full of it. ..........
