理论的七种含义
=============================
发布时间：2010-03-14 11:42
 Theory1. If you use the word ‘theory’ in the sense of theory1, what you mean
by it is a general proposition, or logically-connected system of general propositions,
which establishes a relationship between two or more variables. As an example, let us
consider the ‘mass society version’ of the ‘breakdown theory’ of social movements:
“Individuals are most likely to join social movements when they have few personal
ties within a community and a weak sense of identification with that community”
(Useem 1980:357). This theory establishes a relationship between the variables ‘likelihood
of joining social movements,’ ‘number of personal ties within a certain community,’
and ‘strength of sense of identification with a certain community.’ But what
I would like to stress is that if the theory were put in symbolic form, it would have
to be universally quantified. The subject of the sentence is not ‘some individuals,’
‘late nineteenth-century individuals,’ or ‘Chinese individuals.’ The theory establishes
a relationship between those three variables in general, independently of things like
time and place.
Likewise, when it is said that ‘empirical investigations should make a theoretical
contribution,’ what is usually meant is that ‘empirical investigations should make a
theoretical1 contribution.’ For instance, suppose you write a paper about two social
178 SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY
movements that arose during the May Revolution of 1810 in Buenos Aires. For it
to be accepted for publication in a mainstream sociology journal, some conclusion
about social movements in general must have been drawn. Or, to put it using a
ubiquitous and highly-revealing euphemism, the empirical investigation must have
‘suggested’ some more general conclusion. If there is no such a conclusion, the
reviewers would probably point out that the paper is ‘atheoretical’ or, more benignly,
that it is ‘undertheorized.’
Theory2. A theory2 is an explanation of a particular social phenomenon. In this
sense, if you say that you have a ‘theory’ about the demise of the Valois dynasty in
late-sixteenth-century France, what you mean is that you can offer an explanation
of it. This explanation should identify a number of ‘factors’ or ‘conditions,’ which
individually should pass some sort of counterfactual test for causal relevance, and
whose interaction effects should be somehow taken into account. (A theory2 could
be an explanation of some other kind; I consider only causal explanations because of
their hegemony in contemporary sociology.) So, for example, a theory2 of the concept
of the self tells one why at a certain point in history such a concept came into being.
A theory2 of the stock market crash of October 1929 tells one what brought it
about. A theory2 of the victory of the White Party in the 1860 presidential elections
in Uruguay tells one why it is that it won.
Several epistemological understandings of social explanation are compatible with
the aims of theory2, some of which would see theory1 as a misguided project. By
contrast, the deductive-nomological model of explanation posits a special relation
between theory1 and theory2. As Hempel (1965:240) puts it, “in empirical science,
the explanation of a phenomenon consists in subsuming it under general empirical
laws.” In this view, then, one or more theories1 logically entail a certain theory2.
For instance, in order to explain why the Uruguayan White Party won in 1860, it
is necessary (and sufficient) to appeal to one or more general propositions about
voting behavior, electoral politics, party systems, and so on. What is important from
my point of view, however, is that even for the deductive-nomological model, theory1
and theory2 remain distinct entities.
Theory3. Like theory1 and theory2, the main goal of a theory3 is to say something
about empirical phenomena in the social world. However, the main questions that
theory3 sets out to answer are not of the type ‘what x causes y?’ Rather, given a
certain phenomenon P (or a certain fact, relation, process, trend), it asks: ‘what does
it mean that P?,’ ‘is it significant that P?,’ ‘is it really the case that P?,’ ‘what is P
all about?,’ or ‘how can we make sense of or shed light on P?’ Thus, one can think
of theory3 as a hermeneutical task, even if theorists3 interpret social reality rather
than texts, and they do not necessarily share the philosophical inclinations of the
hermeneutical tradition. To put it another way, what theories3 offer is an original
‘interpretation,’ ‘reading,’ or ‘way of making sense’ of a certain slice of the empirical
world. They may shed new light on an empirical problem, help one understand some
social process, or reveal what ‘really’ went on in a certain conjuncture. Unlike theory1,
theory3 does not view P as the value of a variable y, which in turn is related to other
variables in such a way that can be described by a function y = F(x1, x2, . . ., xn).
Unlike theory2, theory3 may or may not causally explain P.
For example, that you have a theory3 of corruption in twentieth-century Latin
American politics does not mean that you have identified its causes. Nor does it
mean that you know how this case fits into a system of social laws about politics,
corruption, the law, and morality, which specifies the ‘conditions under which’
corruption occurs. Rather, you may mean that your theory helps understand what
THE MEANING OF ‘THEORY’ 179
corruption in twentieth-century Latin American politics ‘is all about’; that it provides
a ‘better interpretation’ of corruption in twentieth-century Latin American politics;
or that it tells a story about corruption in twentieth-century Latin American politics
that is illuminating, instructive, helpful, or edifying. Now, the exact nature of these
‘interpretations’ is difficult to establish a priori, codify, and standardize. Therefore,
theory3 may strike one as conceptually vague, methodologically problematic, or just
unscientific. While they are rarer in U.S. sociology, theories3 are a staple of some
Latin American and European sociological traditions (cf. Abend 2006).
Theory4. The word ‘theory’ and some of its derivatives are sometimes used to refer
to the study of and the students of the writings of authors such as Marx, Weber,
Durkheim, Simmel, Parsons, Habermas, or Bourdieu. These ‘studies’ are variously
described as ‘interpretations,’ ‘analyses,’ ‘critiques,’ ‘hermeneutical reconstructions,’
or ‘exegeses.’ They often involve the study of ‘meaning,’ in either of the two following
meanings of ‘meaning.’ First, they may ask what the author of a text ‘really’ meant,
that is, what she wanted to say when she wrote a particular passage (or essay, book,
oeuvre). Most of the authors with which theory4 concerns itself put forward very
complex arguments, which they put forward in a very complex style. Thus, their
writings lend themselves to discussion about what exactly the argument is. In addition
to these discussions, one can reconstruct the logic of these arguments, identify how
the question is framed and how this framing affects the range of possible answers,
spell out assumptions, crucial concepts, borrowed ideas, etc. Furthermore, most of
these authors have produced a large body of work, so theory4 may also consider
how their thinking evolved, and, more generally, how they relate to their ancestors
and contemporaries. Second, theory4 may ask what the meaning of a certain text is
in another sense, namely, what is its significance, relevance, usefulness, what was or
is original about it, how it has been drawn upon, etc.
Most U.S. departments of sociology have on their faculty one or more persons
who are said to be ‘theorists.’ The graduate and undergraduate courses they teach are
typically called ‘sociological theory,’ ‘social theory,’ ‘classical theory,’ ‘contemporary
theory,’ or something like that. By saying ‘theorists’ and ‘theory courses’ in these
contexts one generally means theorists4 and theory4 courses. Finally, note that you
can say that you: ‘are’ a theorist4; ‘do’ theory4; work in the field of theory4; teach
a theory4 class; have written a theory4 paper; or that one of your scholarly interests
is theory4. In fact, in most of these contexts it is likely that the word ‘theory’ be
taken to mean theory4. However, you cannot have, have developed, or put forward a
theory4. If the expressions ‘have a theory,’ ‘have developed a theory,’ or ‘put forward
a theory’ occur in a sentence, the word ‘theory’ is not being used in the sense of
theory4. Strangely, the predicate ‘(be) a theory4’ cannot be applied to the content of
a theory4 paper, to the product of the activity of doing theory4, or to the work of a
theorist4.
Theory5. A theory5 is a Weltanschauung, that is, an overall perspective from which
one sees and interprets the world. Unlike theories1, theories2, and theories3, theories5
are not about the social world itself, but about how to look at, grasp, and represent
it. That is, theories5 focus on our conceptual and linguistic equipment—for example,
the nature of the location from which we look at the social world, the lexicon and
syntax by means of which we talk about it, the nature of our conceptual scheme,
the categories into which we group things, and the logical relations that there can
be between concepts. Obviously, these ‘conceptual’ and ‘linguistic’ choices entail,
are associated with, or are predicated upon many more general epistemological and
ontological views, which theorists5 may or may not explicitly articulate. To name but
180 SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY
a few: what can be known, what is worth knowing, what kind of questions can be
asked, what counts as good evidence, whom are we talking to, what the social world
is made of, what properties can these entities have, how they fit together, and so on.
In its ideal-typical form, the core of a theory5 does not have truth-values. While
its actual manifestations often include theories1 and theories2, this is not logically
necessary. For the thrust of theory5 is, so to speak, syntactic rather than semantic.
In other words, theories5 (again, in their ideal-typical form) do not offer propositions
about what the social world is like (e.g., ‘Education is correlated with political
participation’ or ‘The main cause of the fall of the Roman Empire was an economic
crisis’). Rather, they offer a way of looking at it or a way of talking about it (e.g.,
‘Society can be thought of as a system’ or ‘The social world can be understood
as containing objects with properties and variables with values’).2 Indeed, there are
interesting similarities between theory5 and Kant’s categories of understanding. Theory5
can be seen as providing one with an a priori framework (scheme, grid, map,
net, plan), a framework that is independent from experience, logically prior to any
contact with the social world. Thus, it would provide the conditions for the very
possibility of experience (or, more conservatively, the conditions for the intelligibility
of experience).
When one speaks of ‘postmodern theory,’ ‘poststructuralist theory,’ ‘feminist theory,’
‘queer theory,’ ‘critical theory,’ ‘Marxist theory,’ ‘structural-functionalist theory,’
‘network exchange theory,’ ‘game theory,’ and ‘rational choice theory,’ one is often
using the word ‘theory’ in this sense. Theory5 can also occur as an adjective in expressions
such as ‘theoretical approach,’ ‘theoretical school,’ ‘theoretical framework,’
‘theoretical perspective,’ ‘theoretical tradition,’ ‘theoretical viewpoint,’ ‘orienting theoretical
strategy,’ and ‘theoretical paradigm.’ This last one, of course, draws a parallel
between the field of sociological theory and Kuhn’s account of the history of science
(Ritzer 1980). Another common example is the expression ‘theory-laden,’ which is
often predicated of ‘observation’ or ‘perception.’
Theory6. Lexicographers trace the etymology of the word ‘theory’ to the late Latin
noun ‘theoria,’ and the Greek noun ‘theoria’ and verb ‘theorein’ (usually translated as
“to look at,” “to observe,” “to see,” or “to contemplate”). The connotations of these
words include detachment, spectatorship, contemplation, and vision. This etymology
notwithstanding, some people use the word ‘theory’ to refer to accounts that have
a fundamental normative component. This usage I identify as theory6. For example,
the contemporary projects of ‘critical theory,’ ‘feminist theory,’ and ‘postcolonial
theory’ are explicitly normative ones, which usually reject the fact/value dichotomy,
and hence the supposedly value-neutral sociological theory. The same is true of a
good deal of ‘Marxist theory’ and ‘neo-Marxist theory,’ which draw inspiration from
Marx’s eleventh thesis on Feuerbach. Indeed, the expression ‘social theory’—as opposed
to ‘sociological theory’—can have similar connotations. At least, self-defined
‘social theorists’ are more likely to do theory6 than, say, theory1. The basic point
for my purposes is that the word ‘theory’ can be used to refer to a normative, and
indeed political, account—a far cry from other senses of it. (The expression ‘social
theory’ transcends the discipline of sociology and has close connections with the
humanities—see, e.g., Christian 1988; de Man 1986; Jay 1996; Knapp and Michaels
2Sometimes these statements are presented as propositions about what the social world is like (e.g.,
‘Society is a system,’ ‘Society is a text,’ ‘Education is a variable,’ ‘Social life is a theatrical performance’).
I take these formulations to be ellipses of ‘Society can be (profitably) thought of as a system,’ ‘Society can
be (profitably) thought of as a text,’ etc. For how could the truth-value of ‘Society is a text’ or ‘Education
is a variable’ be determined?
THE MEANING OF ‘THEORY’ 181
1982. In fact, ‘social theorists’ deliberately try to transcend disciplinary boundaries.
Not surprisingly, ‘social theory’ has been used in a number of different ways. Moreover,
these usages, as well as the relationships between ‘sociological theory’ and ‘social
theory,’ have considerably changed over time—think of ‘social theory’ as used
by Stinchcombe [1968], Merton [1949, 1968], Goode [1973], or Coleman [1990]. Unfortunately,
I cannot carry out a thorough analysis of ‘social theory’ in this paper
[see Seidman and Alexander (2001)].)
Theory7. Many sociologists have written about issues such as the ‘micro-macro
problem,’ the ‘problem of structure and agency,’ or ‘the problem of social order.’
This type of work is usually thought to fall within the domain of sociological theory.
One may also use the word ‘theory’ to refer to discussions about the ways in which
‘reality’ is ‘socially constructed’; the scientific status of sociology (value freedom, the
idea of a social law, the relations between explanation and prediction, explanation
and understanding, reasons and causes, and the like); or the ‘relativity’ of morality.
In these examples the word ‘theory’ assumes a distinct meaning, which I distinguish
as theory7.
Theory7 projects often include theory4 elements (for instance, a reconstruction of
what Marx, Weber, and Durkheim said about the problem under consideration, or
what they would have said had they considered it). Moreover, as a matter of fact,
theorists7 are often theorists4 as well. Yet, whatever its usefulness or reasonableness,
this correlation is not necessary but contingent. Theory7 and theory4 remain two
different projects. Similarly, while there can be relations between theory5 and theory7,
occasionally even relations of necessity, the meaning of the two terms remains distinct.
Theory7 does not refer to an overarching Weltanschauung, a way of looking at or
representing the social world. Rather, it refers to the study of certain special problems
that sociology has encountered. Even though it is because of its being in the business
of empirically investigating society that sociology has encountered these problems,
they are not empirical problems themselves (for example, they cannot be resolved
by means of empirical methods). They may be described as ‘philosophical’ problems,
insofar as they call for reflection upon the nature of knowledge, language, and reality,
and some sort of conceptual analysis. In fact, most of these problems have been taken
up in philosophy as well, usually under different rubrics, in a different voice, and in
isolation from the sociological literature. To conclude with a reflexive note, the present
paper might be said to be a ‘theory’ paper mostly in the sense of theory7.
The Meaning of ‘Theory’
GABRIEL ABEND
Northwestern University
