福山《历史终结与最后的人》310-312：历史终结后的艺术
=============================
发布时间：2011-04-05 01:53
 Alexandre Kojève shared Tocqueville's belief in the inevitability
of modern democracy, even as he too understood its costs in
similar terms. For if man is defined by his desire to struggle for
recognition, and by his work in dominating nature, and if at the
end of history he achieves both recognition of his humanity and
material abundance, then ”Man properly so-called” will cease to
exist because he will have ceased to work and struggle.
The disappearance of Man at the end of History, therefore, is
not a cosmic catastrophe: the natural World remains what it
Men without Chests 311
has been from all eternity. And therefore, it is not a biological
catastrophe either: Man remains alive as animal in harmony
with Nature or given Being. What disappears is Man properly
so-called—that is, Action negating the given, and Error, or in
general, the Subject opposed to the Object . . . 1 8
The end of history would mean the end of wars and bloody revolutions.
Agreeing on ends, men would have no large causes for
which to fight.19 They would satisfy their needs through economic
activity, but they would no longer have to risk their lives in
battle. They would, in other words, become animals again, as they
were before the bloody battle that began history. A dog is content
to sleep in the sun all day provided he is fed, because he is not
dissatisfied with what he is. He does not worry that other dogs are
doing better than him, or that his career as a dog has stagnated,
or that dogs are being oppressed in a distant part of the world. If
man reaches a society in which he has succeeded in abolishing
injustice, his life will come to resemble that of the d o g . 2 0 Human
life, then, involves a curious paradox: it seems to require injustice,
for the struggle against injustice is what calls forth what is highest
in man.
Unlike Nietzsche, Kojève did not rage at the return to animality
at the end of history; rather, he was content to play out the rest
of his life working in that bureaucracy meant to supervise construction
of the final home for the last man, the European Commission.
In a series of ironic footnotes to his lectures on Hegel, he
indicated that the end of history meant also the end of both art
and philosophy, and therewith, his own life activity. It would no
longer be possible to create the great art that was meant to capture
the highest aspirations of an era, like Homer's Iliad, the Madonnas
of da Vinci or Michelangelo, or the giant Buddha of Kamakura,
for there would be no new eras and no particular distinction of
the human spirit for artists to portray. They could write endless
poems on the beauties of springtime or the graceful swell of a
young girl's breast, but they could not say anything fundamentally
new about the human situation. Philosophy too would become
impossible, since with Hegel's system it had achieved the status of
truth. ”Philosophers” of the future, if they were to say something
different from Hegel, could not say anything new, only repeat
earlier forms of ignorance.2 1 But more than that, ”What would
disappear . . . is not only philosophy or the search for discursive
312 THE LAST MAN
Wisdom, but also that Wisdom itself. For in these post-historical
animals, there would no longer be any '[discursive] understanding
of the World and of self.' ” 2 2
The revolutionaries who battled with Ceaescu's Securitate in
Romania, the brave Chinese students who stood up to tanks in
T Square, the Lithuanians who fought Moscow for their
national independence, the Russians who defended their parliament
and president, were the most free and therefore the most
human of beings. They were former slaves who proved themselves
willing to risk their lives in a bloody battle to free themselves.
But when they finally succeed, as they eventually must,
they will create for themselves a stable democratic society in which
struggle and work in the old sense are made unnecessary, and in
which the possibility of their ever again being as free and as human
as in their revolutionary struggle had been abolished.2 3 Today,
they imagine that they would be happy when they get to this
promised land, for many needs and desires which exist in presentday
Romania or China would be fulfilled. One day they too will all
have dishwashers and VCRs and private automobiles. But would
they also be satisfied with themselves? Or would it turn out that
man's satisfaction, as opposed to his happiness, arose not from the
goal itself, but from the struggle and work along the way?
When Nietzsche's Zarathustra told the crowd about the last
man, a clamor arose: ”Give us this last man, O Zarathustra!”
”Turn us into these last men!” they shouted. The life of the last
man is one of physical security and material plenty, precisely what
Western politicians are fond of promising their electorates. Is this
really what the human story has been ”all about” these past few
millennia? Should we fear that we will be both happy and satisfied
with our situation, no longer human beings but animals of the
genus homo sapiens? Or is the danger that we will be happy on one
level, but still ^-satisfied with ourselves on another, and hence
ready to drag the world back into history with all its wars, injustice,
and revolution?
