科耶夫《导读》：什么样的人是哲学家或智者？
=============================
发布时间：2011-04-29 00:49
 All philosophers are in agreement about the defmitioz of the
Wise Man. Moreover, it is very simple and can be stated in a single
sentence: that man is Wise who is capable of answering in a
comprehmsible or satisfactory manner all questions that can be
asked him concerning his acts, and capable of answering in such
fashiont hat the entiity of his answersf or-. r coherenti ir”oorr..
Or else, what amounts to the same thing: that man is Wise who is
fully nd p erf e ctly s elf - c ons eious.
Now, an ewerenesso f the meaning of this definition is sufrcienr
to make us understand yhy Plato, for example, denied the possibiliry
of realizing this ideal of Wisdom.
It is the case that one cen ask any question at all about rny of
our acts-that of washing, for example, or of paying taxes-with
the result that, after several answers that call forttr eaJh dme a new
”why,”_ one comes to the problems of the relationship between
the soul and the body, between the individual and thi State; to
questions reladng to the finite and the infinite, to death and im-
Toft{iry, t9 G9d and the World; and finally to the problem of
knoyledge itself, of this coherent and meaningful language that
permits us to ask q-uestionasn d to enswer them]In shoi, by proceeding,
so to speak, in the vertical plane, one will quickly come
face to fece with rhe.mtire body of'the so-caled phiiosoplrical or
”metaphysical” questions.
On the other hand, by seaing fonh from the same banal act
and proceeding in the 'trorizonial',
plane, one will end u5les
gl9Hyt 9f course-surveying all thi Sciences taught in modern
universities. And perhaps onc will discover still otliers, not yet in
enstence.
In a word, to be able to ans\yera /l questionsr elating to ^ny one
of our acts is, in the fnal an-alysisr,o bi able to
”n”*”-”
att pJssibte
questionsin gmeral. Therefore: ,,to answer all questions. ^. . and
so on” i5 gs vsalizs the encyclopaedia of. possible kinds of knowl-
”dg:. To be perfectly and complerely seliconscious is ro have ar
orre's disposal-at least virtually-'n' mcy clopaedic knowredge in
the full sense of the word.
In defining-the Wise Man, the Man of absolute Knowledgp, as
perfectly self-conscious--i.e., omniscient, at leesr potentiilly_
Hegel nevenheles had the unheard-of audacitv to
”**tt
thai he
realized Wisdom in his own person.
When the Wise Man is discused,h e is usually presentedi n another
guise, which seems more easily attainable'than omniscience.
Thus the Stoics, for example, for whom the idea of the Wise Man
plays a central role and who, in contrasr to plato, aserted the
possibility and even rhe reality of such a men, defne him as that
man who is perfectly satisfiedb y what he is. The Wise Man, then,
would be the man who uants nothing, who desires nothing: he
wents to change nothing, either in himself or ourside of himself;
therefore he does not act. He simply is and does not become; he
maintains himself n identity to himself and he ls satisfed in and
by this identity.
Now, for Hegel, rhis second definition of the Wise Man in
terms of satisfaction is but a paraphrase of the first, the one in terms
of perfect self-knowledge. And he accepts both definitions precisely
becauseh e identifiest hem.
Of course, our object is not to proae this thesis here. For the
proof of it is given by the enirety of the Phenomenologyo, r more
exactly, by its first seven chapters. I shall only indicate that the
asseftionth at perfect satisfactionu lplies and.p resupposefsu ll seUconsciousnessis
more acceptable than the inverse assertion, that
the man who is perfectly self-conscious is necessarlly satisfcd by
what he rs,b y that of which he becomesc onsciousF. undamentally,
to prove the first assertion, it sufices to say this: given that one
can be satisfied only by knowing that one is satisfied, only by
becoming conscioas of one's satisfaction, it follows th* perfect
satisfactioni mplies tn absolute self-consciousnesBs.u t I do not
insist on this reasoning, for I know that we ”moderns” are much
too ”romantic” to let ourselves be convinced by so-called ”easy”-
that is, obaious-+rgnments. I shall, then, merely appeal to our
psychological experience: we believe in vain that we are satisfied;
if someone comes and asks us the question ”why” concerning our
satisfaction, and we cannot answer, this is enough to make the
sati$action disappear as if by enchanrment (even if the sensation
of pleanne, or of happinesso, r of joy, or of simple well-being
resistst he test for a while). Anyone can make this experimentf or
himself. But one can also simply read Plato's dialogue, the lon, in
which just such a man eppears, one who believes he is satisfed
by what he is and who ceasesto be sadsfied,s olely becauseh e
cxnnot funify this satisfaction in answering Socrates' questions.
The scene is completely convincing.l
- $njl”lly speaking, there is a tendency to underesdmate the
disculties of satisfacdona nd to overestimaieth oseo f omniscience.
Accordingln the thinkers who, on the one hand, believe in the
f)rth -of egsy sattsfadon (a myth invented by moralists) and, on
the other hand, preserve the idial of the Wise-Man and know that
it is extremely fficult to realize, have in mind neither ornniscience.
which they believe to be unattainable, nor satisfaction, which thev
believet oo-easyb, ur e tbird definition: they identify Wisdom wit'h
moral pertecdon. Hence the Wise Man-would
-be
rhe morill,y
perfect man.
Heg-el believes he can show that this third definition equals the
second and, consequently, the fust.
I do not believe that enyone can seriously contest the assertion
t!1 the perf ect man is saisfied by what he is. Even Christians are
obliged- to make this asertion once they identify holines with
perfection, and not, as they usually do, either with a minimal
imperfection a minimum of sin, or, on the contrary, with the
maximum conscioasnesos f imperfection, of sin. Therliore: who_
ever speals of moral petection necesarily also speaks of satisfac_
tian by what one is.
To understand why this is so, one need only reflect on the verv
concept of- moral perfection, abstracting from its contmt, WitL
r-egardt o this content, opinions can diveige: there has been much
discussion of the conteit of the morariri that the wise Man is
supposed to reahze perfecrly. But rhis dols not inrcre.sr us for the
moment. It is sufficient to note this: either the concept of moral
perfection has no meening, or else it must be understood as a
human existenceth at servesa st he model for all men, the final end
and motive of their ections being conformity to this model. If,
then, the Wise Man realizes moral perfection in his person, we
must say that his existence serves as the model both for himself
and for othersi he wants to resemble himself indefinitely, and the
others went to resemble him. Now, this is equivalent to saying
that the Wise Man is satisfied by what he n He is satisfied subiectively
in himself, since there is nothing in him that urges him
to go beyond himself, to change-that is, to negate, not ro accept
what he already is. And he is obfectively satisfied, by universal
”recognition,” for no one would went to force him to chenge the
state that satisfiesh im.
I said that the concept of moral pofection is meaningful only
provided that it is uniaersally valid-i.e., accepted as the model by
all men. This may appear debatable, given that we have got inro
the habit of talking ebout seaeral irreducible existential rypesthat
is, several essentially difierent moraliries. And, of course, I
have no intention of dispudng this pluralism-i.e., this ethical
relativism. I only wanted to say that in these conditions it is no
longer meaningful to speak of perf ection. For in this case the concept
of ”perfecdon”
's
strictly identical to rhat of ”subfective
sdti$action.” In effect, to asserr the plurality of existential or moral
types is to asserr that recognition by all men is not implied in the
ideal of the perfection realizable within each one of these types:
therefore, one need only belieae oneself perfect in order io e
perfect; no% to believe that one
's
perfect is obviously to be
s.dtiyfea by whar one is. InverselS ro be satisfied by what one is
is obviously to belieae that one is perfect-that is, in ihe case which
we are considering, to be perf.ect. Hence it is solely by asserting
that there is only
-one
type'of moral perfection thattni completi
the conc lt of satisfaction when one speaks of the perfection of
the satisfiedm an: namely, one completei the conc”ptbf sabjective
satisfactionb y that of objeciae satisfaction-i.e., of satisfactionb y
universal recogniion. But as I said, even in this case one rnort..y
that the truly perfe u man is satisf.edb y what he is. It is only the
tnverse asserdon thar appears debatable: ir seems possible to be
satisfied without being willing and able to serve as ihe model for
a/l others（76-85）.
