科耶夫《导读》里黑格尔论知识分子与恐怖
=============================
发布时间：2011-04-29 00:45
 This Intellectual can subsist only in the christian bourgeois
World, in which e men is able not io be a Master-that is, nit to
have Slaves and not to fight-without thereby becoming a Slave
himself. But the bourgeois Intellectual is nonethelesss -omething
different from the Bourgeois properly so-called. For if, fust lik-e
the Bourgeois, the non-Master, he is issentially peaceful and does
n9t figbt, he differs from the Bourgeois in that he does not asork
either. Hence he is as stripped oithe esential character of the
Slave as he is of that of thi Master.
Not being a Slave, the Intellecnral can liberate himself from the
essentially slavish aspect of christianiry, namely from its theological,
uanscendent elernent. But not being a Masler, he can pro.i”
the element of the Panicular, the ”individualisdc” ideoiogy of
phristial anthropology. In short, being neither Master ,ro, 51”o”,
he is able-in this notbingnessi,n this-absenceo f all given detqmination-
ts'(lsxlizs” in some way the desired synttiesis of Mastery
and Slavery: he can conceive it. Howeve'r, berng neither
Master nor Slave-that is, ab*aining from dl Work anJfrom all
Fighting-te qrnnor traly realize t[e synthesis that he discovers:
without-Fighting and wirhout Work, this rynthesis conceived by
the Intellectual remains purely aerbal.
-\o*, the problem at hand
's
tlis realizttion, f,or only the reality
gf. th9 s1”qoi. can ”sarisfy” Men, complete History, and estab-
Iish the absolute Science. Therefore, the jdeal process must rejoin
the real proce.sst;h e social and historical conditions must be zuch
that the ideology of the Intellectual can be realized. Now, this is
wfLtogkplace at the moment of the French Revolutionn during
which the immanent idea of Individualiry, elaborated by the Intel--
Iectuals of the Enlighrenmeng was realijed in and by t-he Fight of
the working Bourgeois, who were first revolutionaries anJ then
z In fact, the Intellectuel of Chaptcr V (the Man who lives in society end in
a Sate while believing hc iq or pretending to bc, ..alone in the world,') is found
at every stage of the bourgcois World. But in describing him, Hegel hes his contemporarics
especidly in mind.
68
Surwvry or rlE F*st Sb Clvptert I the Phenonenolog5r of Spirit
citizens of the universal and homogeneous State (the Napoleonic
Empire).
The realizatioz of the Christian idea, which was secularized by
the Intellecrual and thus made realizable, is not possible without a
Fight, without a social war, without the risk of life. This is true
for reasons that are in some sense ”metaphlnical.” Since the idea
to be realized is the idea of a synthesis of Mastery and Slavery,
it can be realized only if the slavish element of Work is asociated
with the element of Fighting for life and deeth, which characterizes
the Master: the working-Bourgeois, to become a-”satisfied”-
Citizen of the ”absolute” Sttte, mu.st become a Warrior-that is,
he must introduce death into his existence, by consciously and
voluntarily tirkiog his life, while knowing that he is monal. Now
we have seen that in the bourgeois World there were no Masters.
The Fight in question, rherefore, cannot be a class fight properly
so-called, a war berween the Masters and the Slaves. The Bourgeois
is neither Slave nor Master; he is-being the Slave of Capital
-his oent Slave. It is from himself, therefore, that he must Jree
himself. And that is why the liberating risk of life takes the form
not of risk on the field of battle, but of the risk created by Robe-
:pi”rr+ Terror. The working Bourgeois, turned Revolutionary
himself creares the situation that introduces into him the element
of death. And it is only thanks to the Terror that the idea of the
6nal Synthesis, which definitively ”satisfies” Man, is realized.
It is in the Terror that the State is born in which this ',satisfaction”
is attained. This State, for the author of the Pbenonenology,
is Napoleon's Empire. And Napoleon himself is the wholly ,,sarisfied”
Man, who, in and by his definitive Satisfaction, completes
the course of rhe historical evolurion of humanity. He is the human
Indfuidual in the proper and full senseo f the word; becauseit is
through him, ttuough this perttcular mar; that the .,common
c.au1e,”th e truly universal cause,i s realized; and becauset his particular
man is_reco{rrzed in his very parricularity, by all men,
universally. The only thing that tre lacks is Seff-6s*ciousness;
he ir the perfect Man, but he does not yer know it, and that is
yhy YrTis
not fully ”satisfied” in him alone. He cannor say of.
himself all that I have iust said.
Now, I have said it beceuse I read it in the phenanenology.
Therefore it is Hegel, the author of the phmmnenology, who- is
69
I N T S O D U C T T O N TO T E r I E A D I N C O' E E G I L
p3”h”.* Napo-leon's Self-Consciousress. And since the perfect
Men, the Manfully 'sarisfied” by what he is, can only be'a Man
who knous what he rs, -yho is Uy self-conscious, it i, N”poleon's
existence asi renealed to a[ mln in and by the phnoinercbgy
thar is the realized ideal of human existence.
.11* t why the Chrisdan period (Chapter VI, Section B),
which culminates in Napoleon,hust be completed by a third histolcaf
period, a short one (Chapter VI, Section C),'which is the
ryd9d of German -philosophy, culminating in Hegpl-the author
ot the f henorrtenology.
The phenomenon that completes the historical evolution and
thus makes the absolute Science posible, therefore, is the ,,concepdon”
-(Begreif en) of \apoleon by H.S”l. Ths dyad, formed by
I”t*T pd f-ftg”1, is the perfect Man, fully and definitively
.t1tisfied” by what he is and by what he kniws himself to bi.
This
's
the realization of rhe ideal revealed by the mph of Jesus
Christ, of the God-Man. And that is why Hegel completes Ctt”pter
VI with these words: ”Es ist der erscheinende *This Gott . . ?,; is the revealed God,” the real, true Christ.
Now, having said this, Hegel considers himself obliged to come
to terms with the Christian, theological inteqpretation of the idea
of Christ.-He musr speak of the relation berween his philosophy,
between thePbenomenology,and Christian theology. fie must siy
what this theology is in rcality.
That is the cenual theme of Chapter VII（68-70）.
