维尔诺：诸众、普遍智性、共和国、苏维埃式根据地
=============================
发布时间：2012-02-06 12:52
http://www.16beavergroup.org/mtarchive/archives/000941.php
Multitude, General Intellect, Republic 
The decisive political counterposition is what opposes the Multitude to the People. The concept of ”people” in Hobbes (but also in a large part of the democratic-socialist tradition) is tightly correlated to the existence of the State and is in fact a reverberation of it: ”The People is somewhat that is one, having one will, and to whom one action may be attributed; none of these can properly be said of a Multitude. The People rules in all Governments,” and reciprocally, ”the King is the People.”13 The progressivist notion of ”popular sovereignty” has as its bitter counterpoint an identification of the people with the sovereign, or, if you prefer, the popularity of the king. The multitude, on the other hand, shuns political unity, is recalcitrant to obedience, never achieves the status of juridical personage, and is thus unable to make promises, to make pacts, or to acquire and transfer rights. It is anti-State, but, precisely for this reason, it is also antipopular: the citizens, when they rebel against the State, are ”the Multitude against the People.”14 For the seventeenth-century apologists for sovereign power, ”multitude” was a purely negative defining concept: a regurgitation of the state of nature within civil society, a continuing but somewhat unformed leftover, a metaphor of possible crisis. Liberal thinking, then, tamed the unrest provoked by the ”many” through the dichotomy between public and private: the Multitude is ”private” both in the literal sense of the term, being deprived of both face and voice, and in the juridical sense of being extraneous to the sphere of common affairs. In its turn, democratic-socialist theory produced the dichotomy ”collective/individual”: on the one hand, the collectivity of ”producers” (the ultimate incarnation of the People) comes to be identified with the State, be it with Reagan or with Honecker;on the other, the Multitude is confined to the corral of ”individual” experience-- in other words, condemned to impotence. 
We can say that this destiny of marginality has now come to an end. The Multitude, rather than constituting a ”natural” ante-fact, presents itself as a historical result, a mature arrival point of the transformations that have taken place within the productive process and the forms of life. The ”Many” are erupting onto the scene, and they stand there as absolute protagonists while the crisis of the society of Work is being played out. Post-Fordist social cooperation, in eliminating the frontier between production time and personal time, not to mention the distinction between professional qualities and political aptitudes, creates a new species, which makes the old dichotomies of ”public/private” and ”collective/individual” sound farcical. Neither ”producers” nor ”citizens,” the modern virtuosi attain at last the rank of Multitude. 
What we have here is a lasting and continuing reality, not some noisy intermezzo. Our new Multitude is not a whirlpool of atoms that ”still” lacks unity, but a form of political existence that takes as its starting point a One that is radically heterogeneous to the State: public Intellect. The Many do not make alliances, nor do they transfer rights to the sovereign, because they already have a shared ”score”; they never converge into a ”general will” because they already share a ”general intellect.” The Multitude obstructs and dismantles the mechanisms of political representation. It expresses itself as an ensemble of ”acting minorities,” none of which, however, aspires to transform itself into a majority. It develops a power that refuses to become government. Now, it is the case that each of the ”many” turns out to be inseparable from the ”presence of others,” inconceivable outside of the linguistic cooperation or the ”acting-in-concert” that this presence implies. Cooperation, however, unlike the individual labor time or the individual right of citizenry, is not a ”substance” that is extrapolatable and commutable. It can, of course, be subjected, but it cannot be represented or, for that matter, delegated. The Multitude, which has an exclusive mode of being in its ”acting-in-concert,” is infiltrated by all kinds of Kapos and Quislings, but it does not accredit stand-ins or nominees. 
The States of the developed West are today characterized by a political nonrepresentability of the post-Fordist workforce. In fact, they gain strength from it, drawing from it a paradoxical legitimation for their authoritarian restructuring. The tangible and irreversible crisis of representation offers an opportunity for them to eliminate any remaining semblance of ”public sphere”; to extend enormously, as observed above, the prerogatives of Adminstration at the expense of the politico-parliamentary process; and thus to make an everyday reality of the state of emergency. Institutional reforms are set in motion to prepare the requisite rules and procedures for governing a Multitude upon whom it is no longer possible to superimpose the tranquilizing physiognomy of the ”People.” As interpreted by the post-Keynesian State, the structural weakening of representative democracy comes to be seen as a tendency toward a restriction of democracy tout court. It goes without saying, however, that an opposition to this course of events, if conducted in the name of values of representation, is pathetic and pointless--as useful as preaching chastity to sparrows. Democracy today has to be framed in terms of the construction and experimentation of forms of nonrep-resentative and extraparliamentary democracy. All the rest is vacant chitchat. 
The democracy of the Multitude takes seriously the diagnosis that Carl Schmitt proposed, somewhat bitterly, in the last years of his life: ”The era of the State is now coming to an end... .The State as a model of political unity, the State as title-holder of the most extraordinary of all monopolies, in other words, the monopoly of political decision-making, is about to be dethroned.”15 And the democracy of the Multitude would make one important addition: the monopoly of decision making can only really be taken away from the State if it ceases once and for all to be a monopoly. The public sphere of Intellect, or the Republic of the ”many,” is a centrifugal force: in other words, it excludes not only the continued existence, but also the reconstitution in any form of a unitary ”political body.” The republican conspiracy, to give lasting duration to the antimonopoly impulse, is embodied in those democratic bodies that, being nonrepresentative, prevent, precisely, any reproposi-tion of ”political unity.” Hobbes had a well-known contempt for ”irregular politicall sys-temes,” precisely because they served to adumbrate the Multitude within the heart of the People: ”Irregular Systemes, in their nature, but Leagues, or sometimes meer concourse of people, without union to any particular designe, [not] by obligation of one to another, but proceeding onely from a similitude of wills and inclinations.”16 Well, the Republic of the ”many” consists precisely of institutions of this kind: leagues, councils, and Soviets. Except that, contrary to Hobbes's malevolent judgment, here we are not dealing with ephemeral appearances whose insurgence leaves undisturbed the rights of sovereignty. The leagues, the councils, and the Soviets--in short, the organs of nonrepresentative democracy--give, rather, political expression to the ”acting-in-concert” that, having as its network general intellect, already always enjoys a publicness that is completely different from what is concentrated in the person of the sovereign. The public sphere delineated by ”concourse” in which ”obligation of one to another” does not apply, determines the ”solitude” of the king, in other words, reduces the structure of the State to a very private peripheral band, which is overbearing but at the same time marginal. 
The Soviets of the Multitude interfere conflictually with the State's administrative apparatuses, with a view to eating away at its prerogatives and absorbing its functions. They translate into republican praxis, in other words, into a care for common affairs, those same basic resources--knowledge, communication, a relationship with the ”presence of others”--that are the order of the day in post-Fordist production. They emancipate virtiiosic cooperation from its present connection with waged labor, showing with positive actions how the one goes beyond the other. 
To representation and delegation, the Soviets counterpose an operative style that is far more complex, centered on Example and political repro-ducibility. What is exemplary is a practical initiative that, exhibiting in a particular instance the possible alliance between general intellect and Republic, has the author-itativeness of the prototype, but not the normativity of command. Whether it is a question of the distribution of wealth or the organization of schools, the functioning of the media or the workings of the inner city, the Soviets elaborate actions that are paradigmatic and capable of blossoming into new combinations of knowledge, ethical propensities, technologies, and desires. The Example is not the empirical application of a universal concept, but it has the singularity and the qualitative completeness that, normally, when we speak of the ”life of the mind,” we attribute to an idea. It is, in short, a ”species” that consists of one sole individual. For this reason, the Example may be politically reproduced, but never transposed into an omnivorous ”general program.” 
