罗蒂论哲学和艺术的关系
=============================
发布时间：2010-03-19 01:08
 哲学是不艺术的主牌，但哲学要半路杀出程咬金，来斩断过去的言说与未来的成为之间的关系。哲学是帮助我们战胜自己用过去的叙述和逻辑来断裁未来的老习惯，但不要因此引起社群团结的崩溃的一个途径。你甭想从哲学家那里得到比你从建筑师、诗人和艺术家那里得到更多的东西： As I see it, the attempt to make philosophy useful to the arts is OK if philosophy is used as a source of inspiration but dubious if it is used as a source of instruction.
Remarks at MOMA
Richard Rorty
October 27, 2000
One issue that is raised by Peter Eisenmans writings, and especially by his exchanges with
Jacques Derrida, is that of the relation of philosophy to the rest of culture. I am more suspicious of
attempts to use philosophical ideas outside of philosophy than Eisenman is. In particular, I am not sure
that the criticism of what Derrida has called “the metaphysics of presence” has much relevance to the
work of architects, painters and poets. The first paper I ever wrote on Derridas work and influence was
read to an audience of literary theorists and was called “Now that we have deconstructed metaphysics,
do we have to deconstruct literature too?” That title expressed my skepticism about the attempt to turn
what seemed to me a specifically philosophical movement, a commentary on specifically philosophical
texts, into something larger and more pervasive. As I see it, the attempt to make philosophy useful to the
arts is OK if philosophy is used as a source of inspiration but dubious if it is used as a source of
instruction.
I can clarify what I mean by using philosophy as a source of inspiration by a couple of examples.
Consider the relation of Yeats later poems to the quasi-philosophical system found in his book A VISION.
That system was, or so the story goes, dictated to Yeats wife by spirits. When Yeats asked his wife to ask
the spirits why they were taking all this trouble, what they were there for, they replied that they had come
to give Yeats metaphors for poetry. Among the results of the spirits beneficence were the gyres and the
phases of the moon which pop up here and there in Yeats poems. Readers of these poems, however,
typically do not bother to read A VISION. The poems stand on their own feet, and so do the metaphors
they cultivate. You do not have to take the system seriously to be bowled over by the poems. To write
intelligently about the poems, you need not worry about the truth claims of the system. You need not
regard it as a source of instruction, nor need you even worry about whether or not Yeats himself regarded
it as such.
My second example is the relation of Botticellis Primavera and his Birth of Venus to the neo-
Platonism which was popular among the intellectuals of Botticellis Florence. . Iconographers have done a
lot of decoding of these paintings, using the writings of Marsilio Ficino and others. Botticelli was, they
have shown, inspired by those writings. But you do not have to take neo-Platonism seriously as a set of
propositions about how things really are in order to be bowled over by the paintings, nor to write
intelligently about them. You do not have to ask what propositions Botticelli held to be true, nor whether
they in fact are true. It is enough to be tipped off to the causal influences which Ficino and others exerted
on his imagination.
What did matter for Botticelli was an intellectual ambience that freed him up to paint scenes from
pagan mythology—the ambience we call Renaissance humanism. What mattered for Yeats was the
ambience we call literary modernism—one in which the poets were freed up to do various things they had
not been able to get away with previously. These liberating spiritual climates did not have philosophical
foundations, nor were they applications of philosophical ideas. . They affected philosophy as much as
they affected the arts. They did not have a source in any particular area of culture. They were not the
working out of a dialectic.
One way to tell the difference between a work of art being inspired by a religious or philosophical
view and its being an application of that view by asking yourself: do I need to know about the view in
order to appreciate the work? This is not a very good test, however: appreciation is a matter of degree, so
the more you know about all the circumstances surrounding the creation of the work, the better you can
appreciate it. A slightly less crude test is: do I have to believe in the view in order to take an interest in the
work? Is the work the sort of thing that only a follower of Ficino, or only a convinced reader of A VISION,
or only a pious Hindu, or only a devout Mormon, or only a passionate Heideggerian, can really get into it?
If the answer to this latter question is “yes”, we may begin to have doubts about the value of the
work in question. In the case of works which seem inseperable froem certain religious beliefs, we start
taking about pious kitsch. In the case of works that seem inseperable from a philosophical credo, we may
find ourselves saying that a given cultural province has become over-theorized. If you dont much like
Rothko or Pollock you may grumble that these are paintings that only people who have read too much
Clement Greenberg can love. If you found most of the “deconstructive” readings of literary texts which
were fashionable in the 1970s and the 1980s contrived and pointless, you are likely to say that they only
look good to people who have read too much Derrida. If you dont like Eisenmans houses, you may say
the same.
But one should not say any of these things, for they are all false. In fact, lots of people who are
enthusiastic about Rothko and Pollock find Greenberg a bit silly. There were, I should imagine, lots of
Florentines who loved the Primavera but thought Ficino pointless, and indeed remained unclear about
how the differences between Renaissance humanism and decadent scholasticism. You can like Barbara
Johnsons reading of Melville or Eisenmans houses a lot even if you find philosophy, up to and including
Derrida, a great bore. The work of art may respond to needs quite different from those which were
satisfied by the philosopher who inspired the work, even in cases where the artist thinks of himself or
herself as applying the philosophers principles. In the case of religious kitsch, on the other hand, you are
very unlikely to hang a picture of the Sacred Heart of Jesus on your wall if you do not actually believe that
he died for our sins. Important works of art take on a life of their own independent of their inspiration,
even if that inspiration is regarded by the artist as instruction.
I like Eisenmans houses and Derridas philosophy, but I have trouble seeing the former as an application
of the latter—more trouble than either Eisenman or Derrida do. I think of Derrida as an important
philosopher, one to whom I am very grateful. He has inspired me to write stuff I should not otherwise have
written. But I do not think of myself as applying his ideas. I would be hard pressed to list any beliefs
whose truth I learned from Derridas books. I have found him a liberating influence, but not a source of
premises from which interesting conclusions can be inferred. So when I read the exchanges between
Derrida and Eisenman I am often baffled. I just dont get the connection.
On my reading of him, Derrida is part of a swelling chorus of philosophers who have contributed to a
movement of intellectual liberation, a movement of which Amreican pragmatism was one manifestation.
This movement is a shift away from the idea that there is something to which human beings are
responsible—something like God, or Reality, or Truth. It is a movement toward increasing self-reliance on
the part of our species, toward the idea that we are responsible only to one another, and not to anything
that is neither a human being nor a creation of human beings. Nietzsches and James assaults on the
correspondence theory of truth contributed to this movement. So did Deweys insistence that politics is
not a matter of acting on principle but of social experimentation. So did Heideggers account of what he
called “the onto-theological tradition” as an attempt to find something big and non-human to which human
beings might attach themselves, the being of beings. So do Derridas redescription of this tradition as “the
metaphysics of presence”, and his polemics against the idea of escaping from temporality and
contingency by finding something that will stay forever fixed..
I think of this movement as it appears within philosophy as a repudiation of representationalism. What
binds Derrida to the American pragmatists, and both to and Nietzsche, is the idea that thought and
language are not attempts to get in touch with reality, but attempts to find more imaginative ways of
describing reality. What binds Derrida to Wittgenstein is the idea that linguistic meaning is not a referential
relation between words and the world but a relation between the uses of some words and the uses of
other words. What binds both Derrida and Wittgenstein to such contemporary analytic philosophers as
Davidson and Brandom is that the latter have developed a way of talking about language that defines
reference in terms of the acceptability of inferences, and makes this acceptability a matter of changing
social practice.
Philosophical anti-representationalism is one of many forms that this sense of increasing self-reliance has
taken in recent times. Two of the others are democratic politics and the increasing autonomy of the arts.
Democratic politics, understood as Dewey understood it, is a matter of identifying truth with what free
exchange of opinions arrives at, rather than as conformity with the nature of things. The increasing
autonomy of the artist is a matter of ceasing to treat art as an attempt to represent perfection, and indeed
of abandoning the very idea of perfection. Just as democratic politics says that the decisions of a free
and informed citizenry about what to do cannot be immoral, so the idea that the artist is autonomous says
that what the painters, writers and architects of the day should not be held up to a norm that existed prior
to the inspection of their productions. Rather, the artists should be encouraged to create the taste by
which they will be judged. Just as democratic politics has as its aim to produce as free, and therefore as
diverse, forms of human life as possible, so the idea of the autonomy of art looks forward to an everexpanding
diversity of artistic productions.
The idea that philosophy can produce truths which lesser areas of culture can then proceed to deduce
consequences, or can produce ideas which can then be applied, is hard to reconcile with that of the
autonomy of art. But that bad idea came naturally to the metaphysianss of presence, since metaphysics
purports to offer the ultimate context in which everything, including art, was to be seen. For antirepresentationalist
philosophers, on the other hand, the idea of such a context is as dubious as that of
moral or artistic perfection. These philosophers are not anti-philosophical, and are not interested in
bringing philosophy to an end. But they are interested in getting the educated public to give up on the
idea that theirs is an all-encompassing discipline whose products can be assumed to be relevant to the
rest of culture.
Metaphysics is tied up with the idea of perfection, the idea of a natural terminus to the process of moral or
artistic or political experimentation. The three movements that I have been describing as sharing the goal
of greater self-reliance for humanity are helping us give up the idea the process of the self-creation of
humanity has such a terminus. That is why they all resist the nineteenth-century idea that natural science
is the measure of all things, and that science can set goals as opposed to finding means to accomplish
ends decided upon by non-scientific means. Natural science, considered pragmatically as the discovery
of ways of describing the world which make it more predictable and manageable, does have an
imaginable terminus. We can make good sense of the idea of a perfected science of nature, one which
does not need improvement because it gives us all the technology we are ever going to have, and also
explains why we will not have any more than that—why we will never travel faster than light, for example,
or transmute base metals into gold.. But we have no use for the idea of a novel that makes further
experimental fiction unnecessary, any more than for that of a building that makes architectural
experimentation redundant. Experimentation in the sciences could come to an end because, so to speak,
we know it all. Experimentation in politics and the arts cannot, because, unlike natural science, the
function of these areas of culture are not known in advance. Art and politics change our purposes rather
than simply making us better able to achieve those purposes.
To give up the idea of a natural terminus of inquiry is to exalt the imagination, defined as the faculty that
produces new ideas , over reason, defined as the faculty which makes the ideas we already have
coherent with one another. That is one of the links between the increasing autonomy of the artist and the
pragmatist view of scientific descriptions of reality as ways of achieving human purposes rather than
attempts to be faithful to the intrinsic nature of reality. But to exalt the imagination is to make it less and
less likely that philosophy is going to be useful either for art or for politics. Philosophy as metaphysics
pretended to describe the unchanging context within which the events of political, literary and artistic
history took place. Philosophy as the critique of metaphysics—which is what philosophy has largely
become in the course of the last two hundred years—is like negative theology. It tells you what you
cannot have and therefore should not want—namely, what Derrida calls “a pure presence beyond the
reach of play”. But, as a discipline, it is not in a position to give expert advice about what you should want.
Some people in the philosophy business, of course, have constructed imaginative utopias, fuzzy but
uplifting descriptions of what might be better ways of being human. Hegel, Dewey, Heidegger and
Derrida, are good examples of such utopianism, just as Foucault, Kierkegaard and Strauss are good
examples of dry skepticism about utopian projects. But in a post-metaphysical culture the utopians
among the philosophy professors will be read as speaking not in the name of philosophy as a quasiscientific
discipline, one which produces results which can be applied by specialists in various fields, but
simply on behalf of their own imaginations. They will be read as we read poems or inspect buildings, for
suggestions about what to make of ourselves that have no justification save the promise of avoiding some
of the awkward consequences of past suggestions. So read, they are less likely to be taken as sources of
instruction, and more likely to be read simply for inspiration.
By way of conclusion, I want to offer a gloss on the passage from William James which supplied the title
for this conference. James writes
What really exists is not things made but things in the making. Once made, they are dead, and an infinite
number of alternative conceptual decompositions can be used in defining them. But put yourself in the
making by a stroke of intuitive sympathy with the thing and, the whole range of possible decompositions
coming at once into your possession, you are no longer troubled by the question of which of them is the
more absolutely true. Reality falls in passing into conceptual analysis; it mounts in living its own undivided
life—it buds and burgeons, changes and creates. Once adopt the movement of this life in any given
instance and you know Bergson calls the devenir reel, by which the thing evolves and grows. Philosophy
should seek this kind of living understanding of the movement of reality—not follow science in vainly
patching together fragments of its dead results.
There are various things wrong with this passage, such as the old-fashioned metaphysical contrast
between what really exists and what does not, and the bad Bergsonian idea that we have a faculty called
intuition which can take the place of conceptual thought. But if you read this passage as a meditation on
the relation between history and philosophy, it takes on a non-metaphysical meaning, and says something
important: namely that the human future will always, with a little luck and a lot of imagination, be so
different from the past that it is pointless to look for a set of concepts that will cover both. Bergson was
right to think that the metaphysical attempt to see things under the aspect of eternity was a failure, but he
should have used “history” rather than “life” or “duree” as his description of what defeats that attempt.
Reading James in this way lets one draw the moral: do not think that making the past ideas coherent with
one another will ever enable you to find a substitute for imaginative. Do not think that philosophy will ever
succeed in its attempt to trump poetry and the arts. Do not look to philosophers for anything different than
the sort of inspiration that you get from poets, painters, musicians, and architects. For their ability to find
coherence will never be more than a perspicuous archival arrangement of the imagiantive products of the
past. They will never provide authoritative guidance for the imagination of the present.
John Rajchman describes James as preoccupied with “the problem of novelty”—the problem of how to
deal with “things in the making”, how to see and respond to the emergence of things for which we have
no preset manner of seeing or responding.”.I do not think that there is a solution to this problem, and
therefore, as a good verificationist, I do not see it as a problem. The thing to do with novelty is just to be
grateful for it, and to create the socio-political conditions which will ensure that there will be a lot more of
it. There is a political problem about how to encourage novelty without weakening communal solidarity
and social order, but this is a problem to be solved ambulando, experimentally, and democratically. All that
philosophy can do to help out with this political problem is to keep reminding us of what is likely to happen
if the past is allowed to dictate terms to the future.
