罗蒂对哈贝马斯和德里达的欧洲理想的微妙的批评
=============================
发布时间：2008-04-26 10:56
如果欧盟所提出的新国际秩序有什么用，这种计划必须体现美国似乎变得没能力维持的理想主义。欧盟就不得不提出将为华盛顿讥讽的世界未来的前景。它必须梦想那些被实际政治家们看作荒诞的梦想。但正如哈和德所说，欧洲梦想的有一些在近斯得到了实现。他们有权利说，在二十世纪的后半叶，欧洲找到了transcend超越民族国家的一种解决方案。
If any projects for a new international order put forward by the EU are to be of use, they will have to embody the idealism that  has seemingly become unable to sustain. The EU will have to put forward a vision of the world's future to which  will react with scornful mockery. It will have to offer proposals for rewriting the Charter of the United Nations and for putting the UN in charge of a program of global nuclear disarmament. It will have to dream dreams that will strike Realpolitikers as absurd. But, as Habermas and Derrida point out, some of 's recent dreams have come true. They are right to say that  has, in the second half of the twentieth century, found a solution to the problem of how to transcend the nation state. The EU-just as it stands, even prior to the adoption of a constitution-is already the realization of what the Realpolitikers thought was an idle fantasy. If the sense of shared European citizenship becomes entrenched in the first quarter of the twenty-first century in the way in which the sense of shared American citizenship became entrenched in the last quarter of the eighteenth century, the world will be well on the way to a global confederation. Such a confederation has been recognized, ever since , as the only long-term solution to the problem created by nuclear weapons.
为什么欧洲不再接再砺，致为长于更广大的目标，来守卫基于那种反对相互競争的出发点的国际法之上的世界主义世界秩序？哈和德这样问。是的，干吗不呢？如果欧洲这样做，那它就真的拯救了世界，这是美国的政策所做不到的。往最好的方面说，美国的“国家安全策略”只能延迟灾难诉到来。它只能维持现状到一到二代人左右。罗蒂这里稍稍有一点反讽：干吗不呢？后文说到，欧洲反战大流行游行一下，哈就认为是欧洲公共空间的诞生了，这他也可能认为是 
”Why,” Habermas and Derrida ask, ”should not  . . . devote itself to the broader goal of defending a cosmopolitan world-order based on international law against competing initiatives?” Why not indeed? If  did that, it might just save the world, something that American policy cannot do. At best, 's ”national security strategy” can only postpone disaster. It can only keep things going for another generation or two. If there is ever a time when public opinion must force politicians to be more idealistic than they feel comfortable being, this is it. For all the reasons Habermas and Derrida give, the citizens of Kerneuropa are in the best position to exert such pressure.
If February 15 comes to be seen, as Habermas and Derrida hope it may, as the ”birth of a European public sphere,” the beginning of a new sense of shared European identity, that would change everyone's sense of what is politically possible. Such an upsurge of idealistic self-redefinition would be responded to around the world, in the  and  as well as in  and . It would break the logjam that we are now trapped in. It is, as far as I can see, about the only thing that might. 
