罗蒂：还有什么可让哲学家来做的？
=============================
发布时间：2010-11-09 23:56
罗素式的宏大，和海德格尔式的深度，在我们时代看来，都也只是一种无法穷尽性和无法描述性而已。如今，连哲学家自己都是常识性的唯物主义者和功利主义者了。没有文明的基础需要他们去捍卫，没有更终极的问题是只有哲学家才能来回答，优先来加以回答的了。哲学家只是来平衡公民之间的政治论争，帮助他们更快达到共识而已；况且这事儿也不一定得哲学家自己来做，其它学科的人，也都可以来做的。看透了这一切的哲学家自己也千万别得意得太早，你们也只是窃窃地得意于下面这一点而已：你们自身正在这时代里变得越来越不相关。
罗蒂这样写，是要将他的反讽进行到底，是一种自我解嘲式的表达。没什么好让哲学家来干的了。哲学家在我们这个时代里也许只是那一些不断地在宣布自己的角色已经死亡的人；他是一个在社会中最成功地证明了自己的没用的人。这是置之死地后而生：但是哲学家还可以做这么一小点点。
他在另外的地方写到：哲学家仅仅只是向社会提供某种新意的了，沦为游吟诗人、萨满教巫师那样的角色，是向社会提供“新意”而已。
The main reason for philosophy’s marginalization, as I said earlier, is the same as the reason why the warfare between science and theology looks quaint—the fact that nowadays we are all common-sensically materialist and utilitarian.But there is a further reason. This is that the quarrels which, in the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, graduallyreplaced the warfare between the gods and the giants—the quarrels between philosophy and poetry and between philosophy and sophistry-- have themselves become tedious.
The intellectuals of recent times have grown weary of watching philosophical fashion swing back and forth between enthusiasts for enduring grandeur such as Russell and Nagel and celebrants of ineffable profundity like Bergson and Heidegger. It has become harder to persuade them that the fate of civilization depends either on avoiding the excesses of scientific rationalism or on guarding against the frivolous irrationalism of the litterateurs. The arguments about relativism between pragmatists like myself and those who denounceus as “deniers of truth” excite only very languid interest. The idea that the philosophical foundations of our culture need attention or repair now sounds silly, since it is a long time since anybody thought that it had foundations, philosophical or otherwise. Only the philosophy professors still take seriously the Cartesian idea of a “natural order of reasons”, a ahistorical and transcultural inferential structure that dictates the priority of the questions philosophers ask to the questions other intellectuals ask.
Perhaps the best way to describe the diminishing interest in philosophy among the intellectuals is to say that the infinite is losing its charm.We are becoming common-sensical finitists—people who believe that when we die we rot, that each generation will solve old problems only by creating new ones, that our descendants will look back on much that we have done with incredulous contempt, and that progress toward greater justice and freedom is neither inevitable nor impossible. We are becoming content to see ourselves as a species of animal that makes itself up as it goes along. The secularization of high culture that thinkers like Spinoza and Kant helped bring about has put us in the habit of thinking horizontally rather than vertically—figuring out how we might arrange for a slightly better future, rather than looking up to an outermost framework or down into ineffable depths. Philosophers who think all this is just as it should be can take a certain rueful satisfaction in their own steadily increasing irrelevance.
