美国不光是通过贸易，而且是通过文化-象征秩序来盘剥全世界的
=============================
发布时间：2008-06-04 11:31
 美国通过美元贬值来将它在经济上的过去的投机之后果加到其余世界的人的头上。从美国方面看，问题往往变成是，美国的巨额赤字和贸易顺差，是由中国这样的出口国造成，将这样的成本甩一部分给中国，是合理的。
这问题足够复杂，我们应该分这几个层次来看。
首先，这主要是由一种不合理的世界经济秩序造成。美国不光是通过贸易来主导全世界，而且是通过文化-象征秩序来盘剥全世界的。贸易绝对千正万确只是一种主导式盘剥的借口！
其次，美国的赤字和外债和贸易顺差，也是美国国内的政治安排的产物。其表现于郊外中产阶级日常生活中的铺张和浪费，这种生活方式上的无端的享受，成为全世界其余的人民的负担。为什么会出样这样的杠杆？为什么一国人民中的中产阶级的享受，必须由其余国家的人民来埋单？为什么会有这样荒唐的事儿？
然后，现在，一味让美元贬值本身给美国经济本身的后果，又要让其余的世界的人们来承担了；也就是说，连美国自己搞坏了经济的后果，也要别人来承担了？
这是一个什么样的世界？
这是泰晤士报经济主任编辑写的关于美元贬值给美国自己带去的问题：
The US dollar is “our currency, but your problem” was the famous putdown of John Connally, President Nixon's Treasury Secretary in the early Seventies, as he rudely rebuffed European appeals over the dollar's value.
Washington has been more diplomatic during the dollar's recent fall, but its basic attitude to Europe's growing discomfort at the eurozone's declining competitiveness has been little different.
While Hank Paulson, the present Treasury Secretary, has continued to mouth the standard mantras of a strong dollar policy, Washington has pursued an unspoken strategy of benign neglect. The US stance has been entirely understandable. The dollar needed to fall if the huge global imbalances, driven by America's vast current account deficit, were to be unwound.
More immediately, the boost to American exports from a cheaper currency has been a welcome prop to growth as the US economy has stalled.
Yet this stance was abruptly junked yesterday by Ben Bernanke, the Federal Reserve Chairman. The apparent watershed in US policy was all the more striking in that it came from the Fed chief, and not Mr Paulson, a distinction that was not lost on the markets.
Mr Bernanke's intervention looks well judged for several reasons.
First, there is a lingering risk that the dollar's slide runs out of control and turns into a rout. Were that to happen, the consquences would be disastrous not just for America, but for the world, triggering an inevitable crash in bond markets.
The dangers of such a grave outcome are heightened by the threat of inflation, which provides the second strong rationale for yesterday's shift. While a weaker dollar has helped to underpin growth via exports, now it is hampering both the Fed's efforts to quell inflation and to sustain economic activity.
America's inflation is stoked as the falling dollar drives up its import bills, further imperilling fragile confidence in the currency.
Rising market anxieties over inflation also threaten to drive up the bond yields that determine actual interest rates for businesses and households, reinforcing the credit crunch and undercutting the Fed's loosening of official rates.
Finally, the dollar's losses are adding to the toll both in the United States and globally from soaring oil prices, fuelling the upward pressure on the cost of crude on world markets. For the Fed, this means not only yet more energy inflation but also, at the same time, a further drag on growth as the costs hit American consumers in the pocket.
This time, the dollar's decline has become America's problem, too. Mr Bernanke has made the right move, not only for the United States but for its friends in Europe.
