艺术是人获的匮赠：艺术是人用来维护自己的在这个星球上的诗性地位的
=============================
发布时间：2010-05-23 00:45
 Structural analysis, then, understands structure not only as υθμ but also
as number and elementary principle, that is, as precisely the opposite of a
structure in the sense that the Greeks gave to this word. The search for
structure in criticism and linguistics paradoxically corresponds to the
obscuring and fading into the background of structure in its original meaning.
In structuralist research, then, there takes place a phenomenon analogous to
that which took place in contemporary physics after the introduction of the
notion of quantum action, because of which it is no longer possible to know at
the same time the posi tion of a corpuscle (the ”figure,” as Descartes said, in
an expression corresponding to the Greek σχη + μα) and the amount of its
movement. Structure in the sense of υθμ and structure in the sense of
ριθμ are two quantities traditionally conjugated in the sense that this
expression assumes in contemporary physics, according to which it is not
possible to know both at once. Hence the necessity to adopt statistical and
mathematical methods, as in quantum physics: methods that make it possible
to connect in a unitary representation the two conjugated quantities.
However, at least where the adoption of an exclusively mathematical method
is impossible, structuratist inquiry remains condemned to oscillate endlessly
between the two contradictory semantic poles of the term ”structure”:
structure as rhythm, as that which causes something to be what it is, and
structure as number, element and minimal quantum. Thus, to the extent that
structuralist criticism asks about the work of art, the aesthetic idea of form is
the ultimate obstacle that it can elude but not overcome, since it remains
dependent on the aesthetic-metaphysical determination of the work of art as
matter and form, and therefore represents the work of art at once as the
object of an ασθησι and as original principle.
If rhythm and number are two opposite realities, then Hlderlin's statement
cannot point toward the region inhabited by modern structuralist criticism.
Rhythm is not structure in the sense of ριθμ, minimal quantum, and πρω
+ τον στοιχει + ον, primordial element, but is instead οσα, the principle of
presence that opens and maintains the work of art in its original space. As
such it is neither calculable nor rational; yet it is also not irrational, at least in
the purely negative meaning this word is commonly understood to have. On
the contrary, precisely because rhythm is that which causes the work of art to
be what it is, it is also Measure and logos (ratio) in the Greek sense of that
which gives every thing its proper station in presence. Rhythm attains this
essential dimension, and is Measure in this original meaning; only for this
reason is it able to open a region to human experience in which it can be
perceived as ριθμ and numerus, as calculable measure expressible in
number.
It is only because rhythm situates itself in a dimension in which the very
essence of the work of art is at stake that the ambiguity is possible in which
the work of art presents itself on the one hand as rational and necessary
structure and on the other as pure, disinterested play, in a space in which
calculation and play appear to blur into each other.
But what, then, is the essence of rhythm? What is the power that grants the
work of art its original space? The word ”rhythm” comes from the Greek ω,
to flow, as in the case of water. That which flows does so in a temporal
dimension: it flows in time. According to a popular representation, time is
61
nothing but pure flow, the incessant sequence of instants along an infinite line.
As early a figure as Aristotle, thinking of time as ριθμ κινσεο, the
number of movement, and interpreting the instant as point (στγμη), situated
time in the one-dimensional region of an infinite numerical succession. This is
the dimension of time that is familiar to us and that our chronometers measure
with ever greater precision--whether they employ for this purpose the
movement of cogwheels, as in common watches, or of weight and the
radiation of matter, as in atomic chronometers.
Yet rhythm--as we commonly understand it--appears to introduce into this
eternal flow a split and a stop. Thus in a musical piece, although it is
somehow in time, we perceive rhythm as something that escapes the
incessant flight of instants and appears almost as the presence of an
atemporal dimension in time. In the same way, when we are before a work of
art or a landscape bathed in the light of its own presence, we perceive a stop
in time, as though we were suddenly thrown into a more original time. There is
a stop, an interruption in the incessant flow of instants that, coming from the
future, sinks into the past, and this interruption, this stop, is precisely what
gives and reveals the particular status, the mode of presence proper to the
work of art or the landscape we have before our eyes. We are as though held,
arrested before something, but this being arrested is also a being-outside, an
ek-stasis in a more original dimension.
Such reserve--which gives and at the same time hides its gift -- is called in
Greek ποχ. The verb ποχ, from which this word comes, has a double
meaning: it means both to hold back, to suspend, and to hand over, to
present, to offer. If we consider what we have just said about rhythm, that it
reveals a more original dimension of time and at the same time conceals it in
the onedimensional flight of instants, we can perhaps, with only apparent
violence, translate ποχ as rhythm, and say: rhythm is ποχ, gift and
reserve. But the verb πχω has a third meaning in Greek, a meaning that
unites in itself the other two: to be, in the sense of ”to be present, to be there,
to dominate, to hold.” Thus the Greeks said  νεμο, the wind is, that is: is
present, dominates.
It is in this third sense that we should understand the verse of a poet who
flourished at the time when Greek thought uttered its original word: (Learn
what Rhythm holds men.) 6
'Ο υθμ: rhythm holds, that is, gives and holds back, πχει. Rhythm
grants men both the ecstatic dwelling in a more original dimension and the fall
into the flight of measurable time. It holds epochally the essence of man, that
is, gives him the gift both of being and of nothingness, both of the impulse in
the free space of the work and of the impetus toward shadow and ruin. It is
the original ecstasy that opens for man the space of his world, and only by
starting from it can he experience freedom and alienation, historical
consciousness and loss in time, truth and error.
Now, perhaps, we are able to understand in its proper meaning Hlderlin's
sentence on the work of art. It points neither to an interpretation of the work of
art as structure--that is, at once as Gestalt and number--nor to an exclusive
attention to the stylistic unity of the work and its proper ”rhythm,” since both
the structural and the stylistic analysis remain within the aesthetic conception
of the work of art both as the (scientifically recognizable) object of ασθησι
62
and as formal principle, opus of an operari. Instead, it points toward a
determination of the original structure of the work of art as ποχ and rhythm,
and thus situates it in a dimension in which the very structure of man's beingin-
the-world and his relationship with truth and history are at stake. By
opening to man his authentic temporal dimension, the work of art also opens
for him the space of his belonging to the world, only within which he can take
the original measure of his dwelling on earth and find again his present truth
in the unstoppable flow of linear time.
In this authentic temporal dimension, the poetic status of man on earth finds
its proper meaning. Man has on earth a poetic status, because it is poiesis
that founds for him the original space of his world. Only because in the poetic
ποχ he experiences his being-in-the-world as his essential condition does a
world open up for his action and his existence. Only because he is capable of
the most uncanny power, the power of pro-duction into presence, is he also
capable of praxis, of willed and free activity. Only because he attains, in the
poetic act, a more original temporal dimension is he a historical being, for
whom, that is, at every instant his past and future are at stake.
Thus the gift of art is the most original gift, because it is the gift of the original
site of man. The work of art is neither a cultural ”value” nor a privileged object
for the ασθησι of the spectators, nor the absolute creative power of the
formal principle; instead it situates itself in a more essential dimension,
because it allows man to attain his original status in history and time in his
encounter with it. This is why Aristotle can say in the fifth book of the
Metaphysics: ”arts are also called 'beginnings,' and of these especially the
architectonic arts” ( Metaphysics V, 1013a).
That art is architectonic means, etymologically: art, poiesis, is pro-duction
(τκτω) of origin (ρχ), art is the gift of the original space of man,
architectonics par excellence（《没有内容的人》，59-63）. 
