评Groys的《大众媒体时代的美术馆》：“当代艺术”美术馆不是采集而是来树立“当代”的”
=============================
发布时间：2011-02-13 17:22
Groys提出，美术馆在大众媒体时代里无法取它以前的位置了，而那个位置是现代主义艺术和先锋艺术甩给它，并且早被大众媒体蚕食了大半。它现在应该主动与大众媒体撇清关系。它甚至应该采取一种全新的立场，担当完全不同的角色。
 Groys 提出的“当代艺术”美术馆是一个全新的概念。它负有两个任务：一是去测定当前中有什么是“当代”的；二是去与大众媒体对抗着地建立这种“当代”。
在这样做的过程中，美术馆必然会与大众媒体冲突。实际上，它这是要从大众媒体和艺术商业市场那里夺回它的许多功能。大众媒体缺乏自我反思的能力，它对于“历史记忆”的态度太僵化，倾向于固定当前的主导趣味，将它当作一种时代精神。大众媒体对于美术馆取一种矛盾的态度。一方面，它想要美术馆成为一种谜一样的地方，是意义和趣味的神秘的决定者和来源；另一方面，它又恼怒于美术馆的垄断了对传统和价值的解释权，认为它太学术、太精英，是一个不利于它自己在读者面前的地位的另一个威胁性权威。
在这样的大众媒体篡夺式利用和敌视下，“当代艺术”美术馆必须主动成为批评性话语、激进的理论话语的运作平台，比传统上美术馆的表面的中立更进一步，主动去邀请批评话语和激进政治理论的进驻。不过，这里应该小心的是，批评话语和激进政治理论话语这时应该照德波尔的建议，变身为一种“立足于当前的批判”（悬置全部的意识形态），就是应从一开始就取一种境遇主义式颠覆态度，也就是执行一种彻底的景观批判态度，也就是阿甘本式建议的亵渎式态度：将一切拉进当代，彻底的打破偶像。这要求“当代艺术”美术馆自身先开放，成为所有激进话语的汇合场所。其功能这时也会大大地改变：不是去采集和比较式的挑选，而是在与大众媒体的评价和强加的冲突和斗争中去树立一种“当代”！美术馆再也不可能去到各个作品中去识别什么是当代、什么是当代精神，它必须自己去树立了。“当代艺术”美术馆代替了艺术家的天才，来一次次重新定位什么才是当代的；它是艺术家、艺术批评和艺术品一起来确定什么才是当代、当代艺术和当代艺术的地方。这一点，我认为是Groys这一篇文章通向的认识目标。
《大众媒体时代的美术馆》的重要段落：
1-The general public now draws its notion of art from advertising, MTV, videos, video games and Hollywood blockbusters. Whether this notion of art is good or bad is a mute question: it is what it is. All that matters is that in the context of contemporary, media-generated tastes this call to abandon and dismantle the museum as an institution has taken on an
entirely different meaning than when it was voiced during the avant-garde era. Nowadays this protest is
no longer part of the struggle waged against prevailing normative tastes in the name of innovation but is,
inversely, aimed at stabilizing and entrenching currently prevailing tastes. When people today speak of
‘real life’, what they generally mean is the global media market. This is why art that enters life under such
conditions can never really be ‘new’ art, because the demands and criteria practised by the media market
have always been broadly familiar.
And contemporary art itself time and again displays an eagerness to follow the enticements of the mass media
age, voluntarily abandoning the museum in the quest to be disseminated through media channels. Of
course, this readiness on the part of art to become involved in the media, in broader public
communication and politics, in other words to engage in life beyond the boundaries of the museum, is
quite understandable. This approach allows it address and seduce a much larger audience; it is a decent
way of earning money – which the artist previously had to beg for from the state or private sponsors. It
gives the artist a new sense of power, social relevance and public presence within his or her own time –
preferable to eking out a meagre existence as the poor relation of the media. So the call to break loose
from the museum also amounts de facto to a call to medialize and commercialize art by accommodating it
to the aesthetic norms generated by today’s media. But given that the museum has been divested of its
function as the arbiter of taste, one is nonetheless left wondering why it still continues to hold such strong
attraction for the general public, including the media.
2-there is also something about the museum that clearly irritates the media,
namely everything that has to do with theoretical discourse addressed at art in general or the museum in
particular. Almost every time a museum exhibition is suspected of voicing a theoretical, critical claim the
media react with unveiled animosity. The sole excuse that can save an exhibition in such circumstances is
if ‘in spite of its theoretical pretensions’ it can be said to be sensual and attractive – and hence ultimately
irrelevant. At first glance this reaction by the media might seem rather odd. After all, being theoretical
surely means being open to communication, and the media is in fact supposed to welcome all
communicative endeavours. But in reality, the only artistic and curatorial decisions truly celebrated by the
media are those that appear to be purely subjective, ungrounded and intuitive. Nowadays the media have
ceased to celebrate the individual artist as a genius. Instead, we now witness how the entire museum
system per se is hailed as a genius, as a place where arbitrary, incomprehensible decisions are made about
what constitutes art and what does not, about what is rated good art and what is not. This is nothing less
than a bizarre continuation of the cult of the genius in the wake of the ‘ready-made’ principle.
3-Novelty, or rather topicality, is presented in the media as
a value in its own right to which the consumer is expected to subordinate his personal tastes. So on the
one hand the media profess they are simply satisfying existing tastes, while on the other they are directly
and indirectly canvassing for these tastes to be revised and adjusted to the zeitgeist. Consequently, it can
hardly be claimed that the media market provides the consumer only with what he ‘really’ wants to see
and hear – without any form of patronizing control. On the contrary, at every turn he is being lectured and
instructed about what supposedly constitutes the current zeitgeist – and what does not.
4-The question is, however, can one really learn from the media what is specifically contemporary about the
present? In my view the answer is no – and for one simple reason: the global media market lacks the
historical memory which would enable it to compare the past with the present and thereby determine what
is really new and genuinely contemporary about the present. The old product range in the media market is
constantly being replaced by new merchandise, barring any possibility of comparing what is on offer
today with what used to be available. As a result, media commentary has no choice but to turn to fashion.
But fashionability itself is by no means self-evident or indisputable. While it is perhaps easy for us to
admit that in the age of mass media our lives are dictated predominantly by fashion, how confused we
suddenly become when asked to say precisely what is en vogue just now. So who can actually say what is
fashionable at any given moment? Passing any kind of judgement in this is highly problematic,
particularly in these times of globalization. For instance, if something appears to have become
fashionable in Berlin, one could quickly point out that this trend has long since gone out of fashion
measured against what is currently fashionable in, say, Tokyo or Los Angeles. Yet who can guarantee that
the same Berlin fashion won’t at some later date also hit the streets of Los Angeles or Tokyo? So, when it
comes to assessing the market, we are de facto at the blind mercy of advice dispensed by marketing and
fashion gurus, the purported specialists of international fashion. Yet such advice cannot be verified by the
individual since, as everyone knows, the global market is too vast for him alone to fathom.
5-An individual observer would not necessarily be in a position to undertake such a
comparison if the media were all he had to rely on. So it is hardly surprising that the media also end up
adopting the museum’s diagnosis of what exactly is contemporary about the present, simply because they
themselves are unable to perform a diagnosis of their own.
It is primarily the museum of contemporary art that offers a framework for this diagnosis. Although the
concept of the ‘museum of contemporary art’ is now broadly familiar, it nonetheless still represents a
fundamentally new angle in our way of seeing the museum as an institution. Traditionally, the museum
used to function as a place where evidence of the past was stored and assembled into an overall picture
that was then held to be a socially binding representation of history. From this perspective, though, the
museum of contemporary art would appear to be a paradox. However close to the present moment new art
is being collected, this practice of collecting will always seem to arrive just a little too late – and will
inevitably remain at least one step behind the present. Accordingly, ‘real’ contemporary developments in
art seem never to be caught up by the collecting process or by museographical re-presentation. It is often
said that the museum might perhaps be capable of collecting yesterday, but never today. This, by the way,
is precisely the point where media claims appear most plausible. For, as is frequently claimed, new art
first has to establish itself in life – in the global media market, to be precise – before it can then be
enshrined in the museum, in other words, only once it has achieved success and endorsement in the
market and therewith also social legitimacy.
6-This means that today’s museums are in fact machines designed
not merely to collect, but also to generate the present through their comparison between old and new,
between identical and different. There is no basis to the notion that the process of creating art occurs first
in the media before it is subsequently represented in the museum. Instead, we only recognize something
as being up-to-date, truly contemporary and thus ‘real’ art once we realize that this art has yet to be
collected by or represented in the museum. Rather than reality coming first, with its museum representation
following on in second place, it is the museum collection that tells us what in the here and
now may be considered real. In other words, the museum of contemporary art is ultimately a producer of
contemporary art by the way it establishes what has not yet been collected and thus what, by implication,
must be ‘contemporary’. By contrast, in the context of mass media art is condemned to constantly
reiterating certain external features in an attempt to make art publicly identifiable as art.
7-Hence, for all their loquaciousness the media in fact cultivate a strange zone of muteness that manifests a
deep-set incapacity to discuss their own role as active norm-setters – let alone to critically examine these
norms in the light of their own claims that they embody the zeitgeist. It would be a disastrous mistake if
the museum were also to emulate this strategy of self-denial and likewise strive to fulfil the claim that it is
only showing people ‘what they want to see’. For in stark contrast to the mass media, museums possess
the means and possibilities to be sites of critical discourse. Furthermore, given our current cultural climate
the museum is practically the only place where we can actually step back from our own present and
compare it with other eras. In these terms, the museum is irreplaceable because it is particularly well
suited to critically analyze and challenge the claims of the media-driven zeitgeist.
