读者对巴迪厄的反应：受害者不拉黑文革，而是想拉黑文革后面的政治哲学
=============================
发布时间：2012-05-31 10:56
 1- I like Badiou's philosophical works (Being and Event being one of my top favourites, and I agree very much that he's the best living philosopher to take on Sartre's mantle), but I abhor his being a Maoist apologist. It's a bit like Heidegger and Nazism again, and the same with Agamben actually -- I threw away his book when I read the line he wrote about how the Ti水inanmen Square massacre could be useful or some such shite. What is it about some philosophers that they just can't bring themselves to admit that their previous ideological position and political sympathies are wrong as facts emerged that show up how misguided they once were? It reminds me of the brilliant satire done on some Communist idealists in Doris Lessing's The Golden Notebook. 
2-But if you go carrying pictures of Chairman Mao
You ain't going to make it with anyone anyhow”
Victims tend to invalidate a political philosophy.
3-
The comparison with Heidegger is interesting. I have read a great deal of Heidegger and I have never come across his explicitly defending Nazi violence. I am not saying that he didn't (or that he didn't do so implicitly) just that I haven't come across it. Badiou, on the other hand, has a quite romanticized conception of violence, even the extreme violence and suffering of the cultural revolution. He defends it explicitly, and remains a Maoist. 
This falls in line with thinking of human suffering in a politically abstract way. It's fundamentally heartless--not that Badiou is personally heartless; it's his political thinking that is. This is perhaps what he has in common with the George Bushes of the world, those who are willing to subject large numbers of people to rape and torture and murder (revolution is war, and war is rape and torture and murder) for the sake of their ideas and visions. It is hard to forgive Heidegger his Nazism, but his Gesamtausgabe force us to learn from him anyway. Badiou forces us to learn, too, but this crude romanticizing of violence is dangerous and foolish. 
I have of course read about the cultural revolution. However, I also visited China recently and heard several stories about growing up during that time. The stories were told with sorrow and courage and perseverance and hope for a different kind of future. I'm just not on Badiou's side. I'm on the side of those people who were telling those stories. The real people. The real stories.
4-
Ah the Chinese cultural revolution. Neighbors denouncing neighbors. Teachers killed by their students. The little red book telling you what to think, and loudspeakers in the street playing patriotic music instead of that decadent Mozart and Beethoven. A fun time was had by all.
5-
Why is Badiou worth listening to then? Surely defining yourself as a Maoist in the 21st century is grotesque. Couldn't Stuart Jeffries have at least come come up with some sort of explanation/mitigation of Badiou's position?
This is a long profile/interview with a supposedly highly significant French philosopher but nowhere is it made evident what that significance is. What a wasted opportunity
6-
As the article mentions, Alain Badiou is one of the philosophers who have, since the mid-1960's, 'taken something' from Louis Althusser and, as Perry Anderson has stated, Louis Althusser, along with Jean-Paul Sartre, was one of the two giants of 20th century philosophy.
Never heard of Althusser? Well, in a sense, you're lucky because, while you will have missed out on years of mind-expanding reading, you will not have been exposed to the unrelenting distortions of, and vitriolic and slanderous attacks on, his work from both 'left' and right. And, as is the case with any 'dangerous' intellectual, where he was not attacked he was merely ignored: if you are presently at college/university reading philosophy, think when you last heard his name mentioned or check out how recently any of his books were last withdrawn from your library.
For those wishing to make the effort, and it is an effort until the terminology has been learnt, along with Althusser read also the philosophers who contributed to the Franois Maspero Theorie series in the late-60's/early-70's (Balibar, Lecourt, Macherey, etc.) but body-swerve the intellectual poseurs (Foucault, Derrida, Baudrillard and their ilk). A year or two of conscientious reading of these authors will give you a more profound understanding of philosophy than that of any (non-Marxist) professor of philosophy anywhere.
7-
French Maoist intellectual is not a cuddly name tag. I take it the journalist interviewing Monsieur Badiou didn't ask him about the murderous Pol Pot regime in Cambodia which was supported by some of these chaps when they were wide-eyed idealists. Or would that be too much like hard balling? 
This fellow also has sniped at some of his fellow philosophers. Insulting the religious philosopher Levinas in particular. So perhaps that's why he has been treated with wariness in certain circles.
8-
As for Badiou... I spent a considerable period studying his philosophy, specifically his writings on politics. After a number of years studying in a different area of critical political theory I am relatively confortable suggesting that Badiou is lost in an ideological wilderness of his own making. That does not mean that he does not have interesting things to say. His book on ethics is a brilliant and scathing condemnation of liberalism and contemporary political democracy. however, as with many French philosophers over the past forty years, he is completely ignorant of the need to clarify the normative foundations of his critique.
Furthermore, the fact that he has simply failed to deal with the implications of Marx's analysis of capital in any concrete way is incredibly frustrating. Events and miracles or the hard grind of intellectual investigation and real politics?
9-
