这就是政治的全部：看选举后民众的议论，就知道政治其实是关于什么的
=============================
发布时间：2008-05-02 18:55
 执政党在最近选 举中被狠 很一击，执政党到底出了什么问题，民众到底想要政客们怎样？
全部的政治也就只是这一点儿，有什么好夸大的，但也足够地messy，动不动就一地鸡毛；每个社会里都是那点子事儿在让人起劲。政治哲学是去了解这些讨论背后的指导原则，让每一个参与这样的讨论和表达见解的人在语用上、语义上自省，达到更高的自觉：
It is time we learnt to get away from Party Politics and vote for independent candidates who have been resident in your area and not shipped in to safe seats for us to legitemise them by paying for a house and office. Then that would force the politicians to come up with a new Modus Operendi
 Dave Madley, Alicante, Spain
 Because we are actually dealing with a highly capable good man.........I believe Gordon will defeat the out of touch distortive toffs at the next General Election and wipe that stupid smirk off Osbornes face.................REALITY will checkin as the months progress and the public will wakeup
 Eric, Southwick, England
 I get tired of the pre-1997 era being dragged up to crucify the Tories. Some people have short memories or are bankrupt of pre-1979 history. The Winter of Discontent; wage increases r 20%+ still below inflation despite Clegg Reports;bodies in morgues for weeks, rubbish on streets, strikes anytime.
 Lawrence, Birmingham, UK
 The way this country is run is nothing like democratic. 
We have an unelected prime minister from a party who won 24% of yesterdays vote. At this stage a general election should be forced upon the government. The people of this country are quite clearly unhappy with the current government.
 Phil Burton, Walsall, England
 Where've you been hiding? Now the fight's begun. 
Brown, you're toast...
 John, London,
 We need a Gov't with poiticians vote with thier conscience, work for the good of the country and are not dictated to by thier political leaders. Are there any out there? Didn't think so. Remember, how do you know when a politician is lying - thier lips are moving. None of 'em are any good!
 Ron, Milton Keynes, Bucks
 The Tories haven't won anything - they only found what Labour lost.
 Mark Sheppard, Retford, UK
 I've an 18 year old Labour member and even I can see Labour's lost the plot. Brown out, Miliband in.
 Danny, Lancaster, England
 Inflation at 2%? 
What world do you live in 
Food, Petrol, Gas, Tax, all inflating at 10-15% PA for years 
Interest rates at 5%? 
Tell that to the door to door credit merchants who charge 50%
 Dominic, Manchester, UK
 Hopefully this is the beginning of the end for this spiteful, vindictive, deceitful and totally untrustworthy government.
 Samuel, Sheffield, UK
 More people have a better standard of living in this country than at any other time and its getting better for more people all the time. So what do we do? We try to hand power back to the very party that nearly destroyed this country!!! Be very careful what you ask for - you may just get it.
 Mark Sheppard, Retford, UK
 And when Brown is finally kicked out in the next General Election let's have a full enquiry into the scandal of the expenditure that Labour has squandered. These people need to be made fully accountable.
 Richard Wyld, Effingham, UK
 great news
 riccardo, brussels,
 So Labour will soon come to the end of their long reign and the Tories will take over.Then after ten years or so, they will have screwed up the country so we go back to Labour...  so on  so on... 
We need non consensus politics, braver voters and a system of PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION!!
 Sally, Ruislip, UK
 The most dangerous people for this country are the deluded souls with short memories who think that the Conservatives would or will do any better.
 John Williams, Cardiff, Wales
 All self inflicted, imagine how badly they would have done if Cameron actually had any policies!
 Martin, Tenerife,
 1) Brown hit the pension funds. 
2) Company pension schemes become closed to new employees. 
3) Company pension schemes in trouble. 
4) Grangemouth management tightens their scheme. 
5) Strike 
6) Petrol shortages, country loses oil revenue 
Conclusion: Bad move Gordon, hitting pensions.
 Ian, Fife,
 as an american in britain i was worried the brits had lost their fighting spirit and were going to sit back and let themselves be taxed into oblivion with nary a complaint. well done guys, the faster they are out the better!
 Alex, London, England
 thankyou gordon, not only will you lose your seat in the next general election, but you have also helped lead Scotland to independence. keep doing more!!!!
 matt, brighton,
 These results are more indicitive of the party that surrounds Gordon Brown, rather than his own abilites.
 Paul Flannery, Glasgow,
 Rome and London the leadership goes to the right I wish you to do the same at next general elections with the Tories sending out the Labours.
 Roberto Castellano, Salsomaggiore, Italy
 Is this what Government Ministers call a ”Reality Check”?
 Neil, Gloucestershire, England
 No doubt Gordon Brown will claim he is contrite following the drubbing, he will also claim he will change and listen to the people. It's too late Gordon! Eleven years of Labour rule has wrecked our country, another two will leave many working class in the gutter. Call a General Election now!
 R.B., Leicester,
 Why should Brown care really? He's guaranteed his job with all the expenses and gilt edged pensions for 2 years when he will be able to take a top job in the city and leave all the problems for the Tories to sort out
 Phil, Rugby, England
 How are the Tories going to be any better? Same politicians, same old spin, same old problems, just a different logo. 
The democratic process in this country needs a serious rethink now, before things get worse.
 GO, Bracnell, Berkshire, UK
 Right. Now the onus is on the Cons to come up with a policy. Any policy will do. Oh, and a half decent leader wouldn't hurt either. So, a half decent Tory with a policy... From this lot? Dream on! 
If this doesn't wake up Labour, nothing will. Gordon ”Ivory Tower” Brown - LISTEN TO US, PLEASE.
 Mike L, Chippenham, Wilts
 war,spin,NHs , 10p tax,mass Migration, draconian measures on the sick,Student fees,Crime up, Northern rock,broken army underfunded,billions on billions spenton spin and advisors ,supercasinos, regneration schemes that wreck old communities, lack of NHS dentists etc etc MrBrown new Labour just GO
 shaun, stoke on trent, staffordshire
 Perfectly put Paul from Newcastle, but, you missed the fact that Gordy has also ruined our pensions, but, not his of course. His pension's nice and safe like all other politicians. Nice final salary scheme there for them, at our expense. 
ON YOUR BIKE GORDON.
 CHRIS, Bournemouth,
 Mr Brown tells us our high petrol costs are caused by global forces yet each country in Europe pays the same price for a barrel of oil. This price is then topped up with UK Duty and VAT making it the most expensive in Europe. 
It is this double talk on every subject that makes him 
unelectable.
 Tony Campbell, Northampton, UK
 If you think Brown has done badly in Englandshire and Wales then just wait for the general election results where I fully expect both Brown and Darling to loose their seats in Scotland...
 DickW, Aberdeenshire, Scotland
 It doesn't matter who you vote for, they are all out for themselves, without exception.
 Michael Clarke, Windsor, England
 So the Labour party want to listen to find out what's wrong? Well, listen to this: 
Tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax tax and more tax.
 Gareth, Crowhorne, UK
 Oh dear! What a blow - and Harman on the tele again this morning eating 'umble pie and saying how they must listen to the electorate (just like Brown was saying less than a year ago)! Well they didn't and they don't and they got what they deserved. They are completely out of touch.
 Oxford Don, Oxford, UK
 ”In all my years, i have seen a more dysfunctional government than this.” 
Which is the one have you seen, Dave of Lincoln?
 iain carstairs, bedford, uk
 A victory for deceit and distortion of reality by the tory mind, newspaper propoganda reaching new depths...thats how I see the gains of yesterdays election
 Eric, Southwick, England
 Rising Crime and a total lack of justice, Immigration control non existant and 18 Billion spent on the NHS when you still wait 4hrs in A+E to be seen to, yet all Gordon Brown seems to worry about is global warming and plastic carrier bags! The sooner New Dishonest Labour packs its bags the better!
 Mark Horobin, London,
 Smoke ban, Stealth taxes, EU ref., Smoke ban, Education crisis, NHS crisis, Smoke ban, Immigration crisis, Pensions theft, Smoke ban, Economic crisis, State control, Smoke ban, Lies, Spin, Deceit, Snouts in troughs Smoke BAN - How many more reasons are there? Labour- Just get out!!
 winstonian, Darlington, UK
 With only 24% of national concensus, and an unelected PM ,shouldnt there now be a general election????
 Matt, Naples, Italy
 This vote wasn't so much for the Tories but as a warning to Brown. The swing away from the Lib Dems shows this. I think Cameron will have to continue the fight and a few policies would help....if you don't mind Tories.
 judy, Liverpool, England
 It won't cause Brown any sleepless nights; apparently he hasn't slept properly since becoming PM. 
Didn't turn out to be the 'dream job' he expected then? 
Perhaps 'nightmare' is an apt description. Well, that's how the voter's see it; Brown, 'dead man walking', worst Prime Minister ever.
 Dave Reynolds, York, England
 Last local election Tony Blair said we're listening and then did nothing. 
Gordon, if you want the socialist vote, we need radical policies now!
 jeremy, Ovingham, UK
 Niles from San Diego 
Your government being conservative hasn't turned Europe off, it's just that Bush is an ass, with none of the intelligence or sensitivity needed to rule the world's most powerful country. 
Had enough of GB's taxes
 Anwar, Bromsgrove,
 He sold Gold reserves rock bottom, stealth taxed us all with hidden taxes and now is hitting the workers in the pocket - Good Ridence - tax and spend Gordon
 Simon , Epsom, Surrey
 Looks like car drivers and smokers did bother to go out and vote. Bye bye Nanny state bye bye.
 Cromwell, Leeds, England
 So what did our unelected Prime Minister expect having reneged on a Manifesto Commitment (EU ConTreaty); hammered the low paid with a tax increase; done nothing to help with domestic fuel/petrol price rises - just planning to tax it more; loaded road tax on older cars; raised NI. We've had enough!
 Donna Walker, Effingham, England
 Broken promises on the EU referendum, non-doms rolling in bonuses while the poor starve, NHS budgets slashed to pay for glitzy PFI projects no-one wants, 20 billion pounds for the Olympics no-one wants, our own culture trashed, and the armed forces broken. Good Bye Gordon.
 Philip, Lancaster,
 The unfortunate truth however is that the results are a vote against the Labour Govt, not for the Tories. Shame that you have to vote one way to remove another party. Hardly a mature democratic system. I'm not a party voter BTW 
The Tories made these gains by default
 Lloyd, UK,
 Is it just me that understands there is no such thing as an elected Prime Minister? We elect a ruling party and whoever is its leader becomes PM. This has always been the case. Oh and Bill Peter, the London results were always scheduled to be counted today and will be known this evening.
 Guy Clapperton, London, UK
 Bill Peter, your comment about the Brown being the British Mugabe just highlights your total ignorance. Iflation at 2%, interest rates at 5, no murder of his people - very similar to Zimbabwe!! Cop on sunshine
 Philip, London,
 wilson's turn, heath's turn, callaghan's turn, thatchers turn, blair's turn 
Now there's been a long enough gap for people to forget about the tories disastrous last turn, it's to be their turn again, after labour's current catastrophic misrule 
A two party state capitalism isn't a real democracy.
 simon prichard, somerset, england
 Attack the motorist, as Brown has done, and you will suffer electoral wipeout, with nary a Green to help you. 
David Cameron, take note!
 Jim Carr, UK,
 You English you have no clue how to rebel 
You will end up with the same politicians different brand name con/lab...........and ordinary Tom get's screwed either way. 
DOPES
 Dan, Liverpool, uk
The news is The Tories have won by default; Labour has lost. and its Governmemt is tired and out of touch. 
It is becoming known as THE TAX AND TAX AGAIN PARTY. 
Its solution to every problem.
 Bernard Parke, GUILDFORD,
 wow... just listen to all the spinning from the whiney losers... anything but admit they've lost to the better side... just admit it... the tories have kicked labour to the kerb...
 paulc, gloucester,
 This is what happens when someone thinks he has a God given right to be our leader, take our money, tell us what we can and can't do.... Paul of Newcastle you summed it up perfectly... we want our lives and our country back. 
Gordon and cronies with your big expenses... we wan't you gone!
 Phil A, Headley, Hampshire
 If you socialists are complaining about a drubbing at the polls, just wait until the muzzies get done with you. 
BTW, don't call us, we'll call you.
 Robert de Jong, Vineland, NJ, United States of America
 Maybe now Labour will realise the cash cow has now had enough of being milked. 
Suggest: Reduce petrol tax, reduce cigarette and alcohol duty, recind this pathetic new car license tax, return our pension tax. Oh, and let there be a few pubs where you can have a cigarette after work with a pint!
 Pete, St Albans, England
 Paul from Newcastle - Please ! Go On ! Theres lots more people could add. ! Uncontrolled Immigration ruining Britain, crumbling NHS, The Rich and Poor divide ignored, all flying in the face of what Labour used to stand for. In all my years, i have seen a more dysfunctional government than this.
 Dave, Lincoln,
 Under no circumstance should Brown stand down! 
The conservatives need him to be their opponent going into an election. We do not want a fresh communist face to win over our countries ill educated sheep.
 peterj, Malvern,
 Gordon Brown - National Embarrassment - it's time to go. You have looted our pensions, increased income tax (but called it National Insurance - they'll never twig that one...) and now you can hear the pips squeaking. Sound good?
 Nick B, Khao Lak, Thailand
 If NuLabour get 24% of the vote and Mugabe got 43% of the vote that makes Mugabe more popular than Gordon Brown.
 Mr G, Leeds, UK
 Brown is not down and out yet. Two years is a long time in politics and local council elections let people vent without meaning very much. Labour will come back stronger than ever and Brown will rule for the next decade
 Wilbur Watson, Bangor,
 The only reason theses results can be so bad for Gordon is that before 1997 the Tories weren't controlling much more than a damp paper bag in the Outer Hebrides. Of course it's bad, but in many ways it's just equalising the earlier rout of the Conservatives under Major.
 Loz, London, UK
 Serves Brown right - he doesn't listen and his mind set is that New Labour will rule forever. Perhaps this result will wake him up or even shake him up !!!! Don't hold your breath though !!!!
 Ian Payne, WALSALL,
 Hopefully, the begining of the end. Makes me wonder if the UK is willing to accept that high taxes and big governments simply don't work. Now if the Tories could promise that...
 Patrick Bateman, London,
 It wasn't Cameron, a weak and weedy nobody. This was entirely self inflicted and so well deserved.
 Bill Q, Derby,
 Cameron hasn't ”inflicted” anything upon the Labour party - it is all self-inflicted.
 Martin, Newmarket, Suffolk
 The Conservatives haven't won anything, Labour have handed it to them on a plate. The Back Bench rebellions, constant infighting and lack of leadership from Brown are their downfall. If Labour want to regain any credibility with the Nation they have to put their house in order. Brown must go!
 David, Aberdeen,
 The poison chalice left by Tony Blair has finally killed its intended victim, Gordon Brown. The message is stark. He must resign now. We must hold a General Election, form a new Government and turn the country around. The British people deserve nothing less.
 Charlie Oakley, Winchester, England
 The Tories have 'won' by default because they are just as bad as NuLab and just as enslaved to the City of London. Here in Coventry the Tories have lost overall control of the council.
 Paul, Coventry,
 Let's wait for the excuses from Labour... 
”we're going to start listening” - sorry, you've had over 10 years to listen. 
”we're going to learn from this” - I think it's clear you'll never learn. 
”the result is just a protest by people upset by the global economy” - yeah, right.
 Chris K, Cheltenham, UK
 If Labour think it's just the 10p tax fiasco which is the problem, then they have their heads buried further in the sand than I feared.
 Arthur, Newcastle,
 ' Cameron inflicts' ... Actually Cameron did very little . This was all Labours own work , although they still did better than I thought they would . Chickens and roost spring to mind .
 Benzo, Nr Chelmsford,
 Mismanagement of the economy, and London results not announced. Brown the British Mugabe.
 Bill Peter, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
 Well, Niles, you have to recall that ”conservative” in England is somewhat left of ”Democrat” in the US. Bush is more or less equivalent to the BNP. Brown is an unelected leader who behaves like King Canute. That's why he's failed today.
 clive warner, Monterrey, Mexico
 Congratulation Britain , keep on fighting Labour and Lib Dems new Euro Treaty. Call for a Referendum on Europe now!!!
 e_widiner, shanghai, peoples republic china
 Gordon Brown is finished. My only hope is that he will recognise that it not only in his interests however more importantly it is in the interests of the country and the people whom he serves that he steps down today. He has clearly been over promoted and has ”No Vision” for UK plc. Your fired!
 Rupert, London, UK
 These results are reinforcing what we all felt from the start about Gordon. How can a man so obviously lacking in leadership qualities, and who has spent much of the last 10 years plotting against his leader, be fit to be Prime Minister? Get him out before the damage to the country is irreparable.
 Ian P, London, UK
 down down brown is down..(sung to tune of well known status quo song) 
or as they would sing it in scotland: doon doon broon is doon
 ally, mexico city, mexico
 We in the US keep being told by our liberal politicians that our conservative administration has damaged our relationship with Europe. Yet, Germany, France and the UK turn out the socialists and Italy reaffirms its conservative. What lesson should we take from that?
 Niles, San Diego, CA, USA
 Paul ofe newcastlehas it all and if they think its about the 10p tax issue they are fooling themselves, Brown is an unelected PM who is failing in his job.
 James, Southampton,
 Bye bye Gordon -- good ridance...
 Bob Brown, Carlsbad, USA, California
 Labour got what they deserved. We are sick to death of being taxed on everything, fined for everything, spied on by cctv's, and listening to lies. The smoking ban, the cancellation of the promised election, the EU non-vote, the 10p tax disaster, the bin taxes, car taxes...need I go on?
 Paul, Newcastle, United Kingdom
 You're going down, Gordon Brown.
 Andrew Milner, Karuizawa, Japan
 I wonder if the best result for the Cons is Boris to get the most first preferences by a long way, but to lose out to Ken on the second prefs. Then he wouldn't get to be a risk in the election year to Dave,s landslide in next year's general election.
 David B, LARKHALL, UK
       Show fewer comments 
