这是一个从不将任何事严肃对待，具有出丑闻能力的政治家；为什么选民们现在喜欢这种类型的政客了？
=============================
发布时间：2008-05-05 11:30
 伊顿时的班主任对他的学期评语：“Although there has been no repetition of the disgrace of last half’s academic torpor, it’s clear that Boris has still not been working at anything like the limit of his capacity . . . He is, in fact, pretty idle about it all . . . Boris has something of a tendency to assume that success and honours will drop into his lap: not so, he must work for them.”
带他的班主任过去也带过布莱尔，他将两人作了比较： “Boris had some similarity with Blair as a boy — both of them opted to live on their wits rather than preparation. They both enjoyed performing. In both cases people found them life-enhancing and fun to have around, but also maddening.” But while the young Blair rebelled against the system at Fettes, “Boris wasn’t a rebel at all — a satirist and a humorist rather than a rebel”.
在牛津大学时得到的导师评语：Barnes said his tutorial notes read “‘feeble’, ‘hasn’t read the text’, ‘no essay’, and so on. He wasn’t lazy . . . there were other things which engaged most of his interest”.
学期考的拉丁文翻译是直抄书上，被老师发现，就说： “I’m terribly, terribly sorry, I’ve been so busy I just didn’t have time to put in the mistakes.” 我太忙，连将我的翻译错误放一点进去（混过你的眼）都没功夫！
去泰晤士报当实习生，写新闻是自己乱编，就被辞退；以后当《观察家报》驻欧洲记者，同事们也都认为他发回的报道其实是他自己乱编的，只是没人想指出他来。
将全校最漂亮的女生弄来给自己洗衬衫，婚礼后就弄丢了戒指和证书：他老婆说：“Rings were exchanged, but by the time we had lunch he no longer had his. He always insisted he knew where it was, ie somewhere in the garden, but he had somehow dropped it and lost it within an hour of receiving it.”
离婚后就与儿时的玩伴结婚，后者是有我的离婚诉讼方面的律师，他再也离不了婚。于是开始一大串的绯闻。
他的女人们这样证价他：“Petronella was very much in two minds about the whole thing — but obviously also rather smitten and very flattered. I think she was very thrilled by it all. And of course she hoped he’d leave his wife. And Boris quite rightly didn’t. But I think she felt very betrayed by him. But this was a classic case of a man perhaps hinting he’d leave his wife.”
“He’s the male equivalent of a blonde with big tits. He’s a powerful blond, he’s quite funny and he’s easy and he’d be in love with you for a bit. Then he’d piss off.”
 “When Boris is taking no notice of you you don’t exist. He just seemed rather a juvenile kind of a guy. But when he turns it on, he becomes immensely charming and you feel very flattered to be noticed by him. It’s digital — like a switch — I suppose that’s what charm is like.”
“It’s stress, it’s pressure. If he’s low and wants to cheer himself up I can get 20 text messages. And proposals of marriage. Phone calls in the middle of the night if he’s feeling low. I’ve probably had 100 proposals in total over the year. He does believe it in the moment he says it, because it’s the way to win the game. There’s nothing he wouldn’t do, nothing he wouldn’t say, to get me.”
He doesn’t think he’s a bad person. If you tell him, “You’re sleeping with Petronella — you’re betraying Marina”, he doesn’t have it in him to blame himself. I think the deal is basically that he’s ruled by his feelings. The moment he feels not totally fired up and in love with someone, he needs that fix again. He has what Aristotle calls an incontinent personality.”
“I did take it upon myself to say to Boris that he should bear in mind that his wife was a divorce specialist.”
“He certainly was not going to sack me. He was meant to be having lunch with me to tell me off because my Spectator column was always late, but he didn’t even mention it, because he hates confrontation. We had such fun that we had a series of little lunches.”
“We don’t think Boris is as funny as he thinks he is. His thing is to gloss over all the real damage and pain he’s caused to people. His thing is to be like a little boy — a 40-year-old man being more irresponsible than a well-brought-up teenager.”
小丑市长：
[我是一个图片]
