阿多诺论齐美尔
=============================
发布时间：2007-12-05 14:11
 Simmel did not only encourage students, a generation earlier than Heidegger and Jaspers, to jump out of the channels of scholastic philosophy and to think ”concretely”; his writings gave the onset, from Lukács to Adorno, to revitalize the form of the scientific essay.
Simmel first describes how the increase in the complexity of culture confronts the soul, which instigated this movement, with the paradoxical question whether it is ”still the boss in its own house, or whether it can at least achieve, between its most inner life and that which it has to incorporate as impersonal substances, a harmony with respect to height, meaning and rhythm” (Ibid., p.529). He then tries to discover the mechanism which explains why this increase of an ever more removed objective culture is unavoidable; and he places it solidly in the medium of money. In his Philosophy of Money Simmel transfers the concept of culture from the level of spiritual creation over to the societal and material process of life as a whole. As with Max Weber, the human orders of economy, state and family acquire an independence similar to the cultural value-spheres of science, art and morality; society too meets the soul as a component of objective culture. The market in modern societies now obviously plays the role of a complexity-generating mechanism. With the medium of money the market pushes ahead the social division of labor and thereby the increase in complexity of culture as a whole. In the end, of course, money is only one of the ”forms” in which the subjective spirit, in search for the soul after its own model, objectifies. This is why a ”philosophy of money” should accomplish the program which Simmel set up in the introduction. It should ”build a floor underneath historical materialism, in such a way that the explanatory value of the inclusion of economic life in the causes of spiritual culture is preserved, but also that those economic forms themselves are recognized as the result of deeper valuations and currents of psychological, and, yes, metaphysical presuppositions” (Ibid., p.VIII). Lukács thereby wryly remarks that economic social laws lose their concrete substance and their revolutionary thrust as soon as they are understood as the expression of a general ”cosmic” relationship.10
Money is of an exemplary nature: it portrays the objectivity of exchange relationships in pure abstraction, and yet it is at the same time the basis for the development of a subjectivity which differentiates both in its calculating intellectual powers and in its wandering drives. 
The phenomena of objectification in the end have to retreat from a perspective in which the soul and the forms interact immediately and in which the creative subject meets its externalized essential powers only as objects. The systemically induced distortion of communicatively structured social relationships only comes to the fore when the violent stubbornness of the vulnerable intersubjectivity of our daily praxis of understanding has been refurbished in a completely non-metaphysical way. 
Simmel speaks of a tragedy of culture; he disconnects the pathologies which are exposed in the modern life style from their historical connections, and attributes them to a tendency, imbedded within the process of life, towards the estrangement between the soul and its forms. A strangeness which is so deeply rooted in metaphysics takes away from the diagnosis of the times the power and courage of political-practical conclusions. Of course, Simmel's sympathies are easily revealed. At one time he mentioned the reform movement, initiated by Morris and Ruskin, which wanted to rejuvenate the formal imperative of craftsmanship against the ugliness of industrial mass production. And the yearning for undifferentiated, overseeable totalities, which embrace the social reformers' experiments on the Monte Verità and elsewhere, is at least in consonant with Simmel's pursuit for ”concrete culture” - Rudolf Steiner, after all, was Simmel's contemporary. But, in the end, Simmel reacted to only one movement - the emancipation movement of the bourgeois women before World War I. 
见：GEORG SIMMEL ON PHILOSOPHY AND CULTURE: 
Postscript to a Collection of Essays 
