阿甘本：什么是装置？
=============================
发布时间：2009-10-16 10:28
阿甘本的思想真的是很难把握，诡辩论者的风格，太迂回。就其主要概念直说如下：这个装置是被我们单独奉为神圣的，让它来统治我们。在当代，被统治者太听话了，其主体化可怜到不一定想得到一个主体而是得到一个手机号码来被统治就高兴了！将这种被奉为神圣的东西位回到日常生活中来，就是亵渎。要与这个装置斗，就是这样“使用”它，亵渎着、玩儿着地使用它。我们这个当代社会并不是像公共知识分子们说的那样丢失了人文精神，不将神的东西当神圣，而是太将手机、电脑、书本知识、媒体、银行当一回事儿了。我们自己的主体化的首务，是要与这种种装置斗争，是应亵渎般地使用那些摆置我们的技术－政治－司法－伦理－生物装置，将好运些在我们日常生活中和公共政治－文化领域被奉为神圣的东西当擦屁股纸。这是比治疗更要紧的事儿！阿甘本的写作的得要性我觉得就在这上头。
6.
One of the methodological principles that I constantly
follow in my investigations is to identify in the
texts and contexts on which I work what Feuerbach
What Is an Apparll? 13
used to cal l the philosophical element, that is to say,
the point of their Entwicklungsflihigkeit (literally. capacity
to be developed), the locus and the moment
wherein they are susceptible to a development. Nevertheless,
whenever we interpret and develop the text of
an author in this way, there comes a moment when we
are aware of our inability to proceed any further without
contravening the most elementary rules of hermeneutics.
This means that the development of the text
in question has reached a point of u ndecidabil ity
where it becomes impossible to d isti nguish between
the author and the i nterpreter. Although th is is a particularly
happy moment for the interpreter, he knows
that it is now time to abandon the text that he is analyzing
and to proceed on his own.
I invite you therefore to abandon the context of
f'oucauldian philology in which we have moved up to
now i n order to situate apparatuses in a new context.
I wish to propose to you nothing less than a general
and massive pa rtitioning of beings into two large
groups or classes: on the one hand, living beings (or
substances), and on the other, apparatuses in wh ich
living beings are incessantly captured. On one side,
then, to return to the term inology of the theologians,
lies the ontology of creatures, and on the other side,
the oikonomia of apparatuses that seek to govern and
guide them toward the good.
]4 What J$ an Apparatw?
Further expanding the already large class of Foucauld
ian apparatuses, I shall call an apparatus literally
anything that has in some way the capacity to capture,
orient, determine, intercept, model, control, or secure
the gestures, behaviors, opinions. or discourses of living
beings. Not only, therefore. prisons. mad houses.
the panopticon. schools. confession. factories. disciplines.
juridical measures. and so fort h (whose connection
with power is in a certain sense evident), but also
the pen, writing, literature, phi losophy. agriculture,
cigarettes. navigation, computers, cellular telephones
and-why not-language itself. which is perhaps the
most ancient of apparatuses-one in which thousands
and thousands of years ago a primate inadvertently let
h imself be captured, probably without realizing the
consequences t h at he was about to face.
To recapitulate. we have then two great classes: l iving
beings (or substances) and apparatuses. And. between
these two. as a third class, subjects. I call a subject
that which results from the rclation and. so to
speak. from the relentless fight between living beings
and apparatuses. Naturally. the substances and
the subjects. as in ancient metaphysics. seem to overlap.
but not completely. I n this sense, for example, the
same individual. the samc substance. can be the place
of multiple processes of subjectification: the lIser of
cellular phones, the web surfer. the writer of stories.
What Is all Apptlrtltus? 15
the tango aficionado, the anti-globalizat ion activist,
and so on and so forth. The boundless growth of apparatuses
in our time corresponds to the equally extreme
prol i feration in processes of subjectification.
This may produce the impression that in our time, the
category of subjectivity is wavering and losing its consistency;
but what is at stake. to be precise. is not an
erasure or an overcoming. but rather a dissemi nation
(hat pushes (0 (he extreme the masquerade that has always
accompan ied every personal identity.
7·
It would probably not be wrong to define the extreme
phase of capitalist development i n which we l ive
as a massive accumulation and proliferation of apparatuses.
It is dear that ever since Homo sapiens first appeared.
there have been apparatuses; but we could say
that today there is not even a single instant in which
the life of individuals is not modeled, contaminated,
or controlled by some apparatus. In what way, then,
can we confront this situation, what strategy must we
follow in our everyday hand-to-hand struggle with apparatuses?
What we are looki ng for is neither simply to
destroy them nor, as some naively suggest, to use them
in the correct way.
For example, I live in Italy. a country where the gestures
and behaviors of i ndividuals have been reshaped
16 What Is an Apparatus?
from top to toe by the cellular telephone (which the
Italians dub the ttlefonino). I have developed an implacable
hatred for this apparatus, which has made the relationship
between people all the more abst ract. Although
I found myself more than once wondering
how to destroy or deactivate those telefonini, as well
as how to el imi nate or at least to punish and imprison
those who do not stop using them, I do not believe
that this is the right solution to the problem.
The fact is that according to all indications. apparatuses
are nor a mere accident in which humans are
caught by chance, but rather are rooted in the very
process of ”humanization” that made ” humans” out
of the a n i mals we classify under the rubric Homo sapiens.
In fact, the event that has produced the human
constitutes. for the living being, something like a division,
which reproduces in some way the division that
the oikonomia introduced in God between being and
action. This division separates the living being from itself
and from its immediate relationship with its environment-
that is. with what Jakob von Uexktill and
then Heidegger name the circle of receptors-disi n h ibitors.
The break or interruption of this relationship
produces in living beings both boredom-that is. the
capacity to suspend (his immediate relationship with
their disi nh ibitors-and the Open, which is the possibility
of knowi ng being as such. by constructi ng a
Whllt Is lin Apparatus? 17
world. But. along with these possibilities. we must also
i mmediately consider the apparatuses that crowd the
Open with instruments. objects. gadgets. odds and
ends. and various technologies. Through these apparatuses.
man attempts to nullify the ani malistic behaviors
that are now separated from him. and to enjoy the
Open as such. to enjoy being insofar as it is being. At
the root of each apparatus l ies an all-too-human desire
for happiness. The capture and subjectification of
this desire i n a separate sphere constitutes the specific
power of t he apparatus.
8.
All of th is means that the strategy that we must
adopt in our hand-to-hand combat with appa ratuses
cannot be a simple one. This is because what we are
dealing with here is the liberation of that which remains
captured and separated by means of apparatuses,
i n order to bring it back to a possible common
use. It is from this perspective that I would like now
to speak about a concept that I happen to have worked
on recently. I am referring to a term that originates
in the sphere of Roma n law and rel igion (law and religion
arc closely connected, and not only in ancient
Rome): profanation.
According to Roman law, objects that belonged
in some way to the gods were considered sacred or
18 What Is an Apparatus?
rel igious. As such, these things were removed from
free use and trade among humans: they could nei
ther be sold nor given as security, neither reli nquished
for the enjoyment of others nor subjected to servitude.
Sacrilegious were the acts that violated or transgressed
the special unava ilabil ity of these objects, which were
reserved either for celestial beings (and so they were
properly called ”sacred”) or for the beings of the neth
erworld (in this case, t hey were simply called ”rcli
gious”). While ”to consecrate” (sacrare) was the term
that designated the exit of things from the sphere of
human law, ”to profane” signified, on the contrary, to
restore the thing to the free use of men. ”Profane,” the
great jurist Trebatius was therefore able to write, ” is, in
the truest sense of the word , that which was sacred or
religious, but was then restored to the use and prop
erty of human beings.”
From this perspective, one can define religion as
that which removes things, places, animals. or peo
pie from common use a nd transports them to a sepa
rate sphere. Not only is there no religion without sep
aration, but every separation contains or conserves in
itself a genuinely rel igious nucleus. The apparatus that
activates and regulates separation is sacri fice. Through
a series of minute rituals that vary from culture to cul
ture (which Henri Hubert and Marcel Mauss have
patiently inventoried), sacrifice always sanctions the
What Is an Apparatus? 19
passage of something from the profane to the sacred,
from the human sphere to the divine. But what has
been ritually separated can also be restored to the profane
sphere. Profanation is the counter-apparatus that
restores to common use what sacrifice had separated
and divided.
9·
From this perspective, capitalism and other modern
forms of power seem to generalize and push to the extreme
the processes of separa tion that define religion.
If we consider once again the theological genealogy of
appa ra tuses that I have traced above (a genealogy that
connects them to the Christian paradigm of oikonomia,
that is to say, the divine governance of the world),
we can then see tha t modern apparatuses differ from
their traditional predecessors in a way that renders any
attempt to profane them particularly problematic. Indeed,
every apparatus implies a process of su bjectification,
without which it cannot function as an apparatus
of governance, but is rather reduced to a mere exercise
of violence. On this basis, Foucault has demonstrated
how, in a disciplinary society, apparatuses aim to create-
through a series of pra ctices. discourses, and
bodies of knowledge-docile, yet free, bodies that assume
their ident ity and t heir ”freedom” as subjects in
20 What Is an Apparatus?
the very process of their desubjectification. Apparatus,
then, is first of all a machine that produces subjectifications,
and only as such is it also a machi ne of governance.
The example of confession may elucidate the
matter at hand: the formation of Western subjectivity
that both splits and, nonetheless. masters and secures
the self, is inseparable from this centuries-old activity
of the apparatus of penance-an apparatus in which a
new I is constituted through the negation and, at {he
sa me time, the assumption of the old I. The split of
the subject performed by the apparatus of penance resulted,
therefore, i n the production of a new subject.
which fou nd its real truth in the nontruth of the already
repudiated sinning I. Analogous considerations
can be made concerning the apparatus of the prison:
here is an apparatus that produces, as a more or less
u n foreseen consequence, the constitution of a subject
and of a milieu of delinquents. who then become the
subject of new-and, this time, perfectly calculatcdtechn
iques of governance.
What defines the apparatuses that we have to deal
with in the current phase of capital ism is that they no
longer act as much through the producrion of a subject,
as th rough the processes of what can be called
desubjectificaLiun. A desubjectifying moment is certainly
impl icit i n every process of subjecti fication. As
we have seen, the penitential self is constituted only
What Is an Apparatus? 21
through its own negation. But what we are now witnessing
is that processes of subjectification and processes
of desubjectification seem to become reciprocally
indifferem, and so they do nor give rise to the
recomposition of a new subject, except in larval or,
as it were, spectral form. I n the nuntruth of the subject,
its own truth is no longer at stake. He who lets
h imself be captured by the ”cellular telephone” apparatus-
whatever the intensity of the desire that has
driven h im-cannor acquire a new subjectivity, bur
only a number through which he can, eventually, be
controlled. The spectator who spends his evenings i n
front o f the television set only gets, in exchange for his
desubjectificarion, the frustrated mask of the couch
porato, or his inclusion in the calculation of viewership
ratings.
Here lies the vanity of the wel l-meaning d iscourse
on technology, which asserrs that the problem with apparatuses
can be reduced to the question of their correct
use. Those who make such claims seem to ignore
a simple fact: If a certain process of subjectification (or,
in this case, desubjecti fication) corresponds to every
apparatus, then it is impossible for the subject of an
apparatus ro use it ”in the right way.” Those who conti
nue ro promote similar arguments are, for their parr,
the product of the m edia apparatus in which they are
captured.
22 What Is all ApparatJlS?
10.
Contemporary societies therefore present themselves
as inert bodies going through massive processes
of desubjectification without acknowledging any real
subjectification. Hence the ecl ipse of politics, which
used to presuppose the existence of subjects and real
identities (the workers' movement, the bou rgeoisie,
etc.), and the triumph of the oikonomia, that is to say,
of a pure activity of govern ment that aims at nothi
ng other than its own replication. The Right and
the Left, which today alternate in the ma nagemem
of power, have for this reason very little to do with
the pol itical sphere in wh ich they originated. They
arc simply the names of two poles-the first pointing
without scruple to desubjectification, the second wa nting
instead to hide behi nd the hypocritical mask of
Lile good democratic citizen-of the same governmental
machine.
This, above all, is the source of the pecul iar uneasiness
of power precisely during an era in which it confronts
the most docile and cowardly social body that
has ever existed in human history. It is only an apparem
paradox that the harmless citizen of posti ndustrial
democracies (the Bloom, as it has been effectively suggested
he be called),” who read i ly does everything that
he is asked to do, inasmuch as he leaves his everyday
What Is an AppllrdNlS? 23
gestu res and his health, his amusements and his occupations,
his diet and his desires, to be com manded and
controlled in (he smallest detail by apparatuses, is also
considered by power-perhaps precisely because of
this-as a pOlemial terrorist. Wh ile a new European
norm i mposes biometric apparatuses on all its citizens
by developi ng and perfecting anthropometric technologies
invented in the n ineteenth century in order to
identify recidivist cri m i nals (from mug shots to fingerprinting),
surveillance by means of video cameras
transforms the public space of the city i nto the interior
of an im mense prison. In the eyes of authority-and
maybe rightly so-nothing looks more like a terrorist
than the ordinary man.
The more apparatuses pervade and disseminate
their power in every field of life, the more govern ment
will fi nd itself faced with an elusive element, which
seems to escape its grasp the more it docilely submits
to it. This is neither (0 say thaI (his element constitutes
a revolut ionary subject in its own right, nor that
it can halt or even threaten t he governmental mach ine.
Rather than the proclaimed end of history, we are, in
fact, witnessing the incessant though a imless motion
of this machine, which, in a sort of colossal parody of
theological oikonomia, has assumed the legacy of the
providential governance of the world; yet instead of redeeming
our world, this machine (true to the origi nal
24 What Is an Apparatus?
eschatological vocation of Providence} is leading us to
catastrophe. ！！！！！！！The problem of the profanation of apparatuses-
that is to say, the restitution to common use
of what has been captured and separated in themis,
for this reason, all the more u rgent. But this problem
cannot be properly raised as long as t hose who
are concerned with it are unable to i ntervene in their
own processes of subjectification, any more than in
their own apparatuses, in order to then bring to light
the Ungovernable, which is the beginning and, at the
same time. the vanishing point of every politics.
