阿甘本：什么是物自身？
=============================
发布时间：2009-11-26 00:00
 物自身]物自体只是事物的可说性， sayability：The thing itself is not a thing; it is the very sayability, the very openness at issue in language,which, in language, we always presuppose and forget, perhaps because it is at bottom its own oblivion and abandonment. In the words of the Phaedo (76 d 8), it is what we are always disclosing in speaking, what we are always saying an d communicating, and that of which we nevertheless are always losing sight.
The presuppositional structure of language is the very structure of tradition; we presuppose,
pass on, and thereby--according to the double sense of the word traditio--betray the thing
itself in language, so that language may speak about something (kata tinos). The effacement
of the thing itself is the sole foundation on which it is possible for something like a tradition
to be constituted.
The task of philosophical presentation is to come with speech to help speech, so that, in
speech, speech itself does not remain presupposed but instead comes to speech. At this point,
the presuppositional power of language touches its limit and its end; language says
presuppositions as presuppositions and, in this way, reaches the unpresupposable and
unpresupposed principle (arkhē anypothetos) that, as such, constitutes authentic human
community and communication.
To restore the thing
itself to its place in language and, at the same time, to restore the difficulty of writing, the
place of writing in the poetic task of composition: this is the task of the coming philosophy.
语言是物自身：----A philosophical presentation is thus one that, regardless of what
25
it speaks about, must also take into account the fact that it speaks of it; it must first of all say
language itself (Hence the essential proximity--but also the distance--between philosophy and
theology, a proximity that is at least as ancient as Aristotle's definition of first philosophy as
theologikē).
----This can also be expressed by saying that philosophy is not a vision of the world but a vision
of language; and contemporary thought, indeed, has followed this path all too zealously. Here
a difficulty arises, however, from the fact that--as is implicit in Gaunilo's definition of the
voice-what is at issue in a philosophical presentation cannot be simply a discourse that has
language as its subject, a metalanguage that speaks of language. The voice says nothing;
instead, it shows itself, precisely like logical form according to Wittgenstein. It therefore
cannot become the subject of discourse. Philosophy can only lead thought to the limit of the
voice; it cannot say the voice (or, at least, so it seems).
What unites
human beings among themselves is not a nature, a voice, or a common imprisonment in
signifying language; it is the vision of language itself and, therefore, the experience of
language's limits, its end. A true community can only be a community that is not presupposed.
Pure philosophical presentation, therefore, cannot merely be the presentation of ideas about
language or the world; instead, it must above all be the presentation of the Idea of language
