阿甘本：什么是运动？
=============================
发布时间：2009-03-26 22:33
 My first consideration is that the primacy of the notion of movement lies in the function of the becoming un-political of the people (remember that the people is the un-political element that grows in the shadow and under the protection of the movement). So a first important consequence is that the movement becomes the decisive political concept when the democratic concept of the people, as a political body, is in demise. It shouldn’t come as a surprise to us to say that democracy ends when movements emerge. Substantially there are no democratic movements (if by democracy we mean what traditionally regards the people as the political body constitutive of democracy, if one could think of a democracy that is not grounded on this notion of people then it would be a different question). On this premise, revolutionary traditions on the left agree with Nazism and Fascism. It is not by chance that contemporary thinkers who try to think of a new political body, such as Toni, take a distance from the people and opt for the multitude that in Hobbes is set in opposition to the people. For me and those with a lexical or lexicographical sensibility, it is significant that around Jesus there are never ?a?? or d?μ? ? (technical terms for people in Greek) but only ????? (a mass, multitude, turba , as Saint Gerolamo translates it). The concept of movement presupposes the eclipse of the democratic notion of people as constitutive political body. This is the first thing we need to be aware of when using the concept of movement.
The second implication of this Schmittian concept of movement is that the people is an un-political element whose growth the movement must protect and sustain (Schmitt uses the term Wachsen , biological growth, of plants and animals). As Schmitt proceeds to say, to this un-political people corresponds the un-political sphere of the administration () , and he also evokes the fascist corporatist state. Looking at it today we can’t help seeing in this determination of the people as un-political the implicit recognition, which Schmitt never dares to articulate, of its biopolitical character. The people is now turned from constitutive political body into population: a demographical biological entity, and as such un-political, that the movement has to protect, sustain and let grow. Hence in Schmitt’s theory, when during the 19th century the people ceased to be a political entity and turned into demographical and biological populations, the movement became a necessity. This is something we must be aware of: we live in an era when the transformation of people into population, or of a political into a demographic entity, is an accomplished fact. The people is today a biopolitical entity strictly in Foucault’s sense and this makes the concept of movement necessary. If we want to think the notion of biopolitics differently, as Toni does, and I am close to him in this, though from a different perspective and with more caution, and if we want to think about the intrinsic politicisation of the biopolitical, which is already thoroughly political and needs not be politicised through the movement, then we have to rethink the notion of the movement too: we cannot use this notion a-critically if we wish to rethink the politics of the biopolitical.
http://www.postcapital.org/?p=180#more-180
