阿甘本：什么是ban？
=============================
发布时间：2009-12-12 12:13
 在古罗马，判处死刑是将人consecurate到神的领域，最早的死刑是将人的头裹在一个装有蛇、雄鸡的麻袋扎好扔到水里或悬崖下。这是一种consecratio。所有不洁和有罪的的人和东西人要毁除，都是通过惩罚，将其放到神圣的领域。
人落到homo sacer的处境，则是人被放到了司法秩序之外，但也不被到神圣的领域。也就是说，落到homo sacer头上的主权暴力也不算一种牺牲。人成了一种莫名其妙的受害者。他处于一种双重例外里了。人被他自己吊空了。人成为一种鲁迅说的无常了。
那么人为什么落到这种境地，这种全球化中人和裸生命的直接面对了国家暴力的呢？
这是因为人对自己的ban造成。
人ban了自己语言交往技术和艺术，为了舒服和方便，而求助于手机，人于是只成为一个号码，被中国移动统治，并被它琦天拔毛着了。如果人本来是足球运动员，这等于人将自己禁赛。禁止这个禁那个之后，人就成了这样的一种可怜的homo sacer。在与国家资本主义装置的肉搏中，人的主体退守到了它的最基本的不可再分离的生命形式上。他直接赤裸露面对国家暴力，或成为中国移动的一头奶牛了。而本来，一切我们相信都存在于人与人之间的交往中，你我之间的交往可发生人类的一切。但我们将这个ban掉了。人为什么会自己将自己禁赛的呢？
在古希腊生命的各形式被认为是分离的，死后才联合，葬礼等仪式是要完成为一联合。ban的意思是，我们人将自己的许多生命形式禁掉了。先是国家主权将人的生命形式禁成被统治对象，一切都是为了防止人的肉体起义。到后来，就是我们现在的被禁止成人人都成了homo sacer。这也就是哲学家南西说的：要ban，我们才能形成政治共同体，但因此我们也就只成为一个ban的共同体；我们这个共同体总要ban掉一些人，才成共同体。
在主权状态里，裸生命是既被排除却又被包括进政治里的，这就是ban。在全球化中，民族国家统治框架一散，每一个人都自己成了主权者，自己来这样ban 进ban出了。这就更容易形成诸众。很矛盾地，一种新政治也许可以从这里开始。
We have already encountered a limit sphere of human action that is only ever maintained in a relation of exception. This sphere is that of the sovereign decision, which suspends law in the state of exception and thus implicates bare life within it. We must therefore ask ourselves if the structure of sovereignty and the structure of sacratio might be connected, and if they might, from this perspective, be shown to illuminate each other. We may even then advance a hypothesis: once brought back to his proper place beyond both penal law and sacrifice, homo sacer presents the originary figure of life taken into the sovereign ban and preserves the memory of the originary exclusion through which the political dimension was first constituted. The political sphere of sovereignty was thus constituted through a double exclusion, as an excrescence of the profane in the religious and of the religious in the profane, which takes the form of a zone of indistinction between sacrifice and homicide. The sovereign sphere is the sphere in which it is permitted to kill without committing homicide and without celebrating a sacrifice, and sacred life — that is, life that may be killed but not sacrificed — is the life that has been captured in this sphere.
It is therefore possible to give a first answer to the question we put to ourselves when we delineated the formal structure of the exception. What is captured in the sovereign ban is a human victim who may be killed but not sacrificed: homo sacer. If we give the name bare life or sacred life to the life that constitutes the first content of sovereign power, then we may also arrive at an answer to the Benjaminian query concerning “the origin of the dogma of the sacredness of life.” The life caught in the sovereign ban is the life that is originarily sacred — that is, that may be killed but not sacrificed — and, in this sense, the production of bare life is the originary activity of sovereignty. The sacredness of life, which is invoked today as an absolutely fundamental right in opposition to sovereign power, in fact originally expresses precisely both life’s subjection to a power over death and life’s irreparable exposure in the relation of abandonment.
 The potestas sacrosancta that lay within the competence of the plebeian courts in Rome also attests to the link between sacratio and the constitution of a political powet. The inviolability of the court is founded on the mere fact that when the plebeians first seceded, they swore to avenge the offenses committed against their representative by considering the guilty man a homo sacer. The Latin term lex sacrata, which improperly designated (the plebeians were originally clearly distinct from the leges) what was actually only a charte jurée (Magdelain, La loi, p. 57) of the insurrectionary plebs, originally had no other meaning than that of determining a life that can be killed. Yet for this very reason, the lex sacrata founded a political power that in some way counterbalanced the sovereign power. This is why nothing shows the end of the old republican constitution and the birth of the new absolute power as clearly as the moment in which Augustus assumed the potestas tribunicia and thus becomes sacrosanctus. (Sacrosanctus in perpetuum ut essem, the text of Res gestae declares, et quoad viverem tribuniciapotestas mihi tribuetur, “So that I may be forever sacrosanct, and that the tribunitian power may be attributed to me for my whole life.”)（53）。
