阿甘本：例外统治着我们了
=============================
发布时间：2009-10-30 11:40
这样时，政治系统变成一种死亡装置。我们所生活那个依附于西方的政治经济系统的中国的政治系统本身是一个将我们导向死亡的装置。它的每一次自存努力都会更快地推动我们走向死亡。它是一种假肢，像美国郊区的中产阶级房子内的厨房扩张，引动全球金融危机，而导致它自己被置于死地。
Exception as a rule
That the state of exception since then has become the norm does not only signify that its
undecidability has reached a point of culmination, but also that it is no longer capable of
fulfilling the task assigned to it by Schmitt. According to him, the functioning of the legal
order rests in the last instance on an arrangement, the state of exception, whose aim it is
to make the norm applicable by a temporary suspension of its exercise. But if the
exception becomes the rule, this arrangement can no longer function and Schmitt’s
theory of the state of exception breaks down. In this perspective, the distinction
proposed by Benjamin between - an effective state of exception and a fictitious state of
exception is essential, although little noticed. It can be found already in Schmitt, who
borrowed it from French legal doctrine; but this latter, in line with his critique of the
liberal idea of a state governed by law, deems any state of exception which professes to
be governed by law to be fictitious. Battle of the giants
Benjamin reformulates the opposition in order to turn it against Schmitt: once the
possibility of a state of exception, in which the exception and the norm are temporally
and spatially distinct, has fallen away, what becomes effective is the state of exception in
which we are living, and where we can no longer distinguish the rule. In this case, all
fiction of a bond between it and law disappears: there is only a zone of anomy dominated
by pure violence with no legal cover. Now we are in a position to better understand the
debate between Schmitt and Benjamin. The dispute occurs in that anomic zone which for
Schmitt must maintain its connection to law at all costs, whereas for Benjamin it has to
be twisted free and liberated from this relation. What is at issue here is the relation
between violence and law, i.e., the status of violence as a cipher for political action. The
logomachia over anomy seems to be equally decisive for Western politics as the “battle of
the giants around being” that has defined Western metaphysics. To pure being as the
ultimate stake of metaphysics, corresponds pure violence as the ultimate stake of the
political; to the onto-theological strategy that wants pure being within the net of logos,
corresponds the strategy of exception that has to secure the relation between violence
and law. It is as if law and logos would need an anomic or “a-logic” zone of suspension in
order to found their relation to life.
4. The structural proximity between law and anomy, between pure violence and the state
of exception also has, as is often the case, an inverted figure. Historians, ethnologists,
and folklore specialists are well acquainted with anomic festivals, like the Roman
Saturnalias, the charivari, and the Medieval carnival, that suspend and invert the legal
and social relations defining normal order. Masters pass over into the service of servants,
men dress up and behave like animals, bad habits and crimes that would normally be
illegal are suddenly authorized. Karl Meuli was the first to emphasize the connection
between these anomic festivals and the situations of suspended law that characterize
certain archaic penal institutions. Here, as well as in the iustitium, it is possible to kill a
man without going to trial, to destroy his house, and take his belongings. Far from
reproducing a mythological past, the disorder of the carnival and the tumultuous
destruction of the charivari re-actualize a real historical situation of anomy. The
ambiguous connection between law and anomy is thus brought to light: the state of
exception is transformed into an unrestrained festival where one displays pure violence
in order to enjoy it in full freedom.
5. The Western political system thus seems to be a double apparatus, founded in a
dialectic between two heterogeneous and, as it were, antithetical elements; nomos and
anomy, legal right and pure violence, the law and the forms of life whose articulation is
to be guaranteed by the state of exception. As long as these elements remain separated,
their dialectic works, but when they tend toward a reciprocal indetermination and to a
fusion into a unique power with two sides, when the state of exception becomes the rule,
the political system transforms into an apparatus of death. We ask: why does nomos
have a constitutive need for anomy? Why does the politics of the West have to measure
up to this interior void? What, then, is the substance of the political, if it is essentially
assigned to this legal vacuum? As long as we are not able to respond to these questions,
we can no more respond to this other question whose echo traverses all of Western
political history: what does it mean to act politically?
