阿甘本：艺术作品的源初结构
=============================
发布时间：2009-10-24 00:22
阿甘本说，荷尔德林的认为作品只是一个句子，很让我们困惑，需要从下面这个海德格尔曾涉及的角度，才能更好地认识：人要达到历史的存在，需要一个东西将他导入其历史存在，这个东西就是艺术作品。
艺术品是人走向历史存在时用的这样一种结构。什么是结构？先不管现代结构主义怎么说的，阿甘本回溯到亚里士多德：结构是各种因素的集合。但他觉得这仍是现代主义式的。于他他再追到早期希腊哲学家，从节奏（韵律）与数来理解“结构”这个说法。现代结构主义者认为，结构就是作品外围；但阿甘本指出，作为艺术品的本源的结构，可能是韵律，而后者据那些哲学家可能是人的存在的本质。
艺术作品是一种制造这种韵律的architectonic（结构、构造技术），是poiesis（自我生产），是对本源的创造式、自我生产式导引。艺术向我们匮赠人的本源空间。艺术也是像其 他的神秘仪式那样，是要打破我们所处的亵渎式时间，激活原本的神秘时间，使人重新成为神的同代人。在艺术品中，线性时间的连续性被打破，人在过去和未来之间恢复了他的在场空间。凝视一个艺术品，意味着被抛到了一个更本源的时间中：我们被拖入韵律的开天辟地般的打开中的狂喜the epochal opening of rhythm，它既给予，又夺回。这是人的最高介入。在体验艺术品时，人站到了真理中。也就是说，站到了那一创造性行动中所揭示给他的真理中。在这一抛出中，艺术家与观众恢复了他们原初步的团结。这是美学做不到的。
荷尔德林说的艺术品是一个句子，意思是：它导引我们进入那一本源时间，使人恢复其在地球上的诗性存在的地位，使人不再暗晦于其历史存在：在历史存在与他的诗性存在之间再没有隔离。
 § 9 The Original Structure of the Work of Art
”Everything is rhythm, the entire destiny of man is one heavenly rhythm, just
as every work of art is one rhythm, and everything swings from the poetizing
lips of the god.” 1 This statement was not passed down to us by Hlderlin's
own hand. It is from a period of his life--1807-43--that we usually define as the
years of his insanity. The words that compose it were transcribed by a visitor's
sympathetic hand from the ”incoherent speech” that he uttered in his room in
the house of the carpenter Zimmer. Bettina von Arnim, including them in her
book Die Günderode, commented: ”[ Hlderlin's] words are for me like the
words of an oracle, which he exclaims in his madness like the priest of the
58
god, and certainly the whole worldly life is senseless for him, since it does not
touch him. . . . He is an apparition, and light streams into my thought.” 2
What Hlderlin's sentence says appears at first blush too obscure and general
to tempt us to take it into consideration in a philosophical query on the work of
art. However, if we want to submit to its proper meaning, that is, if we want, in
order to correspond to it, to make it first of all into a problem for us, then the
question that immediately arises is: what is rhythm, which Hlderlin attributes
to the work of art as its original characteristic?
The word ”rhythm” is not foreign to the tradition of Western thought. We
encounter it, for example, at a crucial point of Aristotle's Physics, at the
beginning of Book II, precisely at the moment when Aristotle, after reviewing
and criticizing the theories of his predecessors, tackles the problem of the
definition of nature. To be sure, Aristotle does not directly use the word rhythm
(υθμ); however, he employs the privative expression τ ρρθμιστον,
meaning that which in itself lacks rhythm. Seeking the essence of nature, he
relates the opinion of the sophist Antiphon, according to whom nature is τ
πρω + τον ρρθμιστον, that which is in itself shapeless and without
structure, inarticulate matter subtended to any shape and mutation, that is, the
prime and irreducible element (στοιχY+03B5ι + ον), identified by some with
fire, by others with earth, air, and water ( Aristotle, Physics 1 93)a). In contrast
to τ πρω + τον ρρθμιστον, υθμ is what adds itself to this immutable
substratum and, by adding itself to it, composes and shapes it, giving it
structure. In this sense, rhythm is structure, scheme, in opposition to
elemental, inarticulate nature. 3
Understood from this perspective, Hlderlin's sentence would mean that every
work of art is one structure, and would therefore imply an interpretation of the
original being of the work of art as υθμ, structure. If this is true, the
sentence would also in some way point toward the path taken by
contemporary criticism when it seeks the ”structures” of the work of art,
abandoning traditional aesthetics.
But is it in fact so? Let us not rush to conclusions. If we took at the different
meanings the word ”structure” assumes today in the natural sciences, we
notice that they all rotate around a definition derived from the psychology of
form, which Lalande, in the second edition of his dictionary of philosophy,
summarizes as follows: ”in opposition to a simple combination of elements, a
whole formed by phenomena in solidarity, such that each phenomenon
depends on the others and can be what it is only in and through its relation
with them.” 4 Structure then, like Gestalt, is a whole that contains something
more than the simple sum of its parts.
If we now observe more closely the use that contemporary criticism makes of
this word, we notice that there is in it a substantial ambiguity, such that
”structure” designates sometimes the prime and irreducible element of the
object in question, and sometimes what causes the ensemble to be what it is
(that is, something more than the sum of its parts), in other words its proper
status.
This ambiguity is not due to a simple imprecision or an arbitrariness on the
part of the scholars who use the word ”structure”; rather, it is the consequence
of a difficulty already observed by Aristotle at the end of the seventh book of
the Metaphysics. Here he asks what causes the fact that--in an ensemble that
59
is not a mere aggregate (σωρ), but unity (ν, which corresponds to
structure in the sense we have seen)--the whole is more than the simple
combination of its elements: why, for instance, the syllable βα is not the
consonant β plus the vowel α, but something else, τερν τι. Aristotle
observes that the only solution that seems possible at first blush is that this
”something else” is, in its turn, something other than an element or an
ensemble constituted by elements. However, if this is true--as seems obvious,
because this ”something else” must exist in some way--the solution to the
problem infinitely recedes (ε πειρον βαδιει + ται), because the ensemble
will now be the result of its parts plus another element, and the problem
becomes that of the interminable search for an ultimate, irreducible element,
beyond which it is not possible to proceed.
This was precisely the case for those thinkers who determined the character
of nature as το πρω + τον and then looked for the prime elements (στοιχει
+ α). It was in particular the case for the Pythagoreans: numbers (ριθμο),
because of their particular nature, at once material and immaterial, seemed to
be the prime elements, and it was impossible to go back past them; thus the
Pythagoreans thought that numbers were the original principles of all things.
Aristotle's reproach to them was that they considered numbers at once as an
element, that is, as the ultimate component, minimum quantum, and also as
that which causes something to be what it is, as the original principle of the
presence of an ensemble ( Metaphysics i, 9 90)a).
For Aristotle, the ”something else” that causes the whole to be more than the
sum of its parts had to be something radically other, that is, not an element
that existed in the same way as the others-even if it were a prime, more
universal element--but something that could be found only by abandoning the
terrain of division ad infinitum to enter a more essential dimension. Aristotle
designates this dimension as the ατα του +  ε + ναι, the ”cause of
being,” and the οσα, the principle that gives origin and maintains every thing
in presence: not a material element but Form (μορ κα ε + δο).
Therefore, in the passage from the second book of the Physics referred to
earlier, Aristotle refuses the theory expounded by Antiphon and by all those
who define nature as elementary matter, τ ρρθμιστον, and instead
identifies nature, that is, the original principle of presence, precisely with
υθμ, structure understood as synonymous with Form.
If we now ask again about the ambiguity of the term ”structure” in the
sciences of man, we see that in a way they make the same mistake that
Aristotle attributed to the Pythagoreans. They start from the idea of structure
as a whole that contains something more than its elements, but then--
precisely to the extent that they intend to construct themselves as ”sciences”
by abandoning the region of philosophical inquiry--they understand this
”something” as an element in its turn: the prime element, the ultimate
quantum beyond which the object loses its reality. And since, as had already
happened for the Pythagoreans, mathematics seems to offer a way to escape
infinite regression, structural analysis seeks everywhere the original cipher
(ριθμ) of the phenomenon that is its object, and tends more and more to
adopt a mathematical method, thus joining that general process of
mathematization of human concerns that is one of the essential
characteristics of our time. 5
60
Structural analysis, then, understands structure not only as υθμ but also
as number and elementary principle, that is, as precisely the opposite of a
structure in the sense that the Greeks gave to this word. The search for
structure in criticism and linguistics paradoxically corresponds to the
obscuring and fading into the background of structure in its original meaning.
In structuralist research, then, there takes place a phenomenon analogous to
that which took place in contemporary physics after the introduction of the
notion of quantum action, because of which it is no longer possible to know at
the same time the posi tion of a corpuscle (the ”figure,” as Descartes said, in
an expression corresponding to the Greek σχη + μα) and the amount of its
movement. Structure in the sense of υθμ and structure in the sense of
ριθμ are two quantities traditionally conjugated in the sense that this
expression assumes in contemporary physics, according to which it is not
possible to know both at once. Hence the necessity to adopt statistical and
mathematical methods, as in quantum physics: methods that make it possible
to connect in a unitary representation the two conjugated quantities.
However, at least where the adoption of an exclusively mathematical method
is impossible, structuratist inquiry remains condemned to oscillate endlessly
between the two contradictory semantic poles of the term ”structure”:
structure as rhythm, as that which causes something to be what it is, and
structure as number, element and minimal quantum. Thus, to the extent that
structuralist criticism asks about the work of art, the aesthetic idea of form is
the ultimate obstacle that it can elude but not overcome, since it remains
dependent on the aesthetic-metaphysical determination of the work of art as
matter and form, and therefore represents the work of art at once as the
object of an ασθησι and as original principle.
If rhythm and number are two opposite realities, then Hlderlin's statement
cannot point toward the region inhabited by modern structuralist criticism.
Rhythm is not structure in the sense of ριθμ, minimal quantum, and πρω
+ τον στοιχει + ον, primordial element, but is instead οσα, the principle of
presence that opens and maintains the work of art in its original space. As
such it is neither calculable nor rational; yet it is also not irrational, at least in
the purely negative meaning this word is commonly understood to have. On
the contrary, precisely because rhythm is that which causes the work of art to
be what it is, it is also Measure and logos (ratio) in the Greek sense of that
which gives every thing its proper station in presence. Rhythm attains this
essential dimension, and is Measure in this original meaning; only for this
reason is it able to open a region to human experience in which it can be
perceived as ριθμ and numerus, as calculable measure expressible in
number.
It is only because rhythm situates itself in a dimension in which the very
essence of the work of art is at stake that the ambiguity is possible in which
the work of art presents itself on the one hand as rational and necessary
structure and on the other as pure, disinterested play, in a space in which
calculation and play appear to blur into each other.
But what, then, is the essence of rhythm? What is the power that grants the
work of art its original space? The word ”rhythm” comes from the Greek ω,
to flow, as in the case of water. That which flows does so in a temporal
dimension: it flows in time. According to a popular representation, time is
61
nothing but pure flow, the incessant sequence of instants along an infinite line.
As early a figure as Aristotle, thinking of time as ριθμ κινσεο, the
number of movement, and interpreting the instant as point (στγμη), situated
time in the one-dimensional region of an infinite numerical succession. This is
the dimension of time that is familiar to us and that our chronometers measure
with ever greater precision--whether they employ for this purpose the
movement of cogwheels, as in common watches, or of weight and the
radiation of matter, as in atomic chronometers.
Yet rhythm--as we commonly understand it--appears to introduce into this
eternal flow a split and a stop. Thus in a musical piece, although it is
somehow in time, we perceive rhythm as something that escapes the
incessant flight of instants and appears almost as the presence of an
atemporal dimension in time. In the same way, when we are before a work of
art or a landscape bathed in the light of its own presence, we perceive a stop
in time, as though we were suddenly thrown into a more original time. There is
a stop, an interruption in the incessant flow of instants that, coming from the
future, sinks into the past, and this interruption, this stop, is precisely what
gives and reveals the particular status, the mode of presence proper to the
work of art or the landscape we have before our eyes. We are as though held,
arrested before something, but this being arrested is also a being-outside, an
ek-stasis in a more original dimension.
Such reserve--which gives and at the same time hides its gift -- is called in
Greek ποχ. The verb ποχ, from which this word comes, has a double
meaning: it means both to hold back, to suspend, and to hand over, to
present, to offer. If we consider what we have just said about rhythm, that it
reveals a more original dimension of time and at the same time conceals it in
the onedimensional flight of instants, we can perhaps, with only apparent
violence, translate ποχ as rhythm, and say: rhythm is ποχ, gift and
reserve. But the verb πχω has a third meaning in Greek, a meaning that
unites in itself the other two: to be, in the sense of ”to be present, to be there,
to dominate, to hold.” Thus the Greeks said  νεμο, the wind is, that is: is
present, dominates.
It is in this third sense that we should understand the verse of a poet who
flourished at the time when Greek thought uttered its original word: (Learn
what Rhythm holds men.) 6
'Ο υθμ: rhythm holds, that is, gives and holds back, πχει. Rhythm
grants men both the ecstatic dwelling in a more original dimension and the fall
into the flight of measurable time. It holds epochally the essence of man, that
is, gives him the gift both of being and of nothingness, both of the impulse in
the free space of the work and of the impetus toward shadow and ruin. It is
the original ecstasy that opens for man the space of his world, and only by
starting from it can he experience freedom and alienation, historical
consciousness and loss in time, truth and error.
Now, perhaps, we are able to understand in its proper meaning Hlderlin's
sentence on the work of art. It points neither to an interpretation of the work of
art as structure--that is, at once as Gestalt and number--nor to an exclusive
attention to the stylistic unity of the work and its proper ”rhythm,” since both
the structural and the stylistic analysis remain within the aesthetic conception
of the work of art both as the (scientifically recognizable) object of ασθησι
62
and as formal principle, opus of an operari. Instead, it points toward a
determination of the original structure of the work of art as ποχ and rhythm,
and thus situates it in a dimension in which the very structure of man's beingin-
the-world and his relationship with truth and history are at stake. By
opening to man his authentic temporal dimension, the work of art also opens
for him the space of his belonging to the world, only within which he can take
the original measure of his dwelling on earth and find again his present truth
in the unstoppable flow of linear time.
In this authentic temporal dimension, the poetic status of man on earth finds
its proper meaning. Man has on earth a poetic status, because it is poiesis
that founds for him the original space of his world. Only because in the poetic
ποχ he experiences his being-in-the-world as his essential condition does a
world open up for his action and his existence. Only because he is capable of
the most uncanny power, the power of pro-duction into presence, is he also
capable of praxis, of willed and free activity. Only because he attains, in the
poetic act, a more original temporal dimension is he a historical being, for
whom, that is, at every instant his past and future are at stake.
Thus the gift of art is the most original gift, because it is the gift of the original
site of man. The work of art is neither a cultural ”value” nor a privileged object
for the ασθησι of the spectators, nor the absolute creative power of the
formal principle; instead it situates itself in a more essential dimension,
because it allows man to attain his original status in history and time in his
encounter with it. This is why Aristotle can say in the fifth book of the
Metaphysics: ”arts are also called 'beginnings,' and of these especially the
architectonic arts” ( Metaphysics V, 1013a).
That art is architectonic means, etymologically: art, poiesis, is pro-duction
(τκτω) of origin (ρχ), art is the gift of the original space of man,
architectonics par excellence. Just as all other mythictraditional systems
celebrate rituals and festivals to interrupt the homogeneity of profane time
and, reactualizing the original mythic time, to allow man to become again the
contemporary of the gods and to reattain the primordial dimension of creation,
so in the work of art the continuum of linear time is broken, and man recovers,
between past and future, his present space.
To look at a work of art, therefore, means to be hurled out into a more original
time: it means ecstasy in the epochal opening of rhythm, which gives and
holds back. Only by starting from this situation of man's relationship with the
work of art is it possible to comprehend how this relationship--if it is
authentic--is also for man the highest engagement, that is, the engagement
that keeps him in the truth and grants to his dwelling on earth its original
status. In the experience of the work of art, man stands in the truth, that is, in
the origin that has revealed itself to him in the poietic act. In this engagement,
in this being-hurled-out into the ποχη of rhythm, artists and spectators
recover their essential solidarity and their common ground.
When the work of art is instead offered for aesthetic enjoyment and its formal
aspect is appreciated and analyzed, this still remains far from attaining the
essential structure of the work, that is, the origin that gives itself in the work of
art and remains reserved in it. Aesthetics, then, is unable to think of art
according to its proper statute, and so long as man is prisoner of an aesthetic
perspective, the essence of art remains closed to him.
63
This original structure of the work of art is now obscured. At the extreme point
of its metaphysical destiny, art, now a nihilistic power, a ”self-annihilating
nothing,” wanders in the desert of terra aesthetica and eternally circles the
split that cuts through it. Its alienation is the fundamental alienation, since it
points to the alienation of nothing less than man's original historical space. In
the work of art man risks losing not simply a piece of cultural wealth, however
precious, and not even the privileged expression of his creative energy: it is
the very space of his world, in which and only in which he can find himself as
man and as being capable of action and knowledge.
If this is true, when man has lost his poetic status he cannot simply
reconstruct his measure elsewhere: ”it may be that any other salvation than
that which comes from where the danger is, is still within non-safety [Unheil].”
7 Whether and when art will again have the task of taking the original measure
of man on earth is not, therefore, a subject on which one can make
predictions; neither can we say whether poiesis will recover its proper status
beyond the interminable twilight that covers the terra aesthetica. The only
thing we can say is that art will not simply be able to leap beyond its shadow
to climb over its destiny.（见《没有内容的人》，58-64）
