麦金太尔论传统以及我们是在何种意义和程度上传承一种文化传统和历史
=============================
发布时间：2009-03-08 12:07
 不得不接受的那一份传统，我们先被讲进那个故事里了：
'What am I to do?' if I can answer the prior question 'Of what story or stories do I find myself a part?' We enter human society, that is, with one or more imputed characters -- roles into which we have been drafted -- and we have to learn what they are in order to be able to understand how others respond to us and how our responses to them are apt to be construed. (After Virtue, p. 216)
What I am, therefore, is in key part what I inherit, a specific past that is present to some degree in my present. I find myself part of a history and that is generally to say, whether I like it or not, whether I recognize it or not, one of the bearers of a tradition... What constitutes such traditions?
但我们不得不激烈地改变它与它冲突，才能激活它，但这也就只将我们生于其中的传统变成了一个论点了！它有待论证！
We are apt to be misled here by the ideological uses to which the concept of a tradition has been put by conservative political theorists. Characteristically such theorists have followed Burke in constrasting tradition with reason and the stability of tradition with conflict. Both contrasts obfuscate. For all reasoning takes place within the context of some traditional mode of thought, transcending through criticism and invention the limitations of what had hitherto been reasoned in that tradition; this is as true of modern physics as of medieval logic...
Traditions, when vital, embody continuities of conflict. Indeed when a tradition becomes Burkean, it is already dead...
A living tradition then is an historically extended, socially embodied argument, an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition. (p. 221-222)
象柏克那样对待传统，也就是要以它的自然本质作质押，象主权者那样守卫它，是将传统弄死了，但像休谟那样，则又使得故事无从讲起，传统不能成为我们的论辩对手了。
a ”living” tradition as ”an historically extended, socially embodied argument.” (34) ”a tradition is an argument extended through time in which certain fundamental agreements are defined and redefined in terms of two kinds of conflict,” . (35) ”To be an adherent of a tradition is always to enact some further stage in the development of one's tradition.” (29) ”genuinely first principles, so I shall argue, can have a place only within a universe characterized in terms of certain determinate, fixed and unalterable ends, ends which provide a standard by reference to which our individual purposes, desires, interests and decisions can be evaluated as well or badly directed.” (31)
三种对传统统的态度中，奥古斯丁式是可以撇开，柏克式是自杀式的，麦金太尔推荐 一种“托马斯主义式”，有一点后现代式的伦理自释：什么都来一点搀一点儿的sophistication，一种老练得有点玩世不恭的伦理上的自信，在文学形象里，我们见到的是奥斯汀笔下的一开始反叛的女主角，如爱玛们：A也可以，B也可以，最后还很为自己的道德冒险后的回归感到庆幸；不是解放了，而是成长了，在过后的岁月中找到了自己在一种一开始令自己压抑的传统中找到了角色。
不过，这种盎格鲁哲学式的折衷，好象与法国理论家们的对于传统的那种写作式、理论式的批判或解构态度，很不同。
总的说，麦金太尔的将传统当作一种参与我们当前论辩的论点的一方，也已是很激进的一种态度了。传统必须是一种“冲突的连续性”。学习和传承它，只是试着去叙述，最终是要与我们处身的传统对质，与它干上的。
