齐泽克：当代社会中的角色
=============================
发布时间：2010-01-26 23:53
 I will now speak a little more briefly. I want to conclude with a
remark about the possible role of philosophy in our society. There is
a whole series of false philosophical positions: neo-Kantian state
philosophy, postmodern neo-Sophism and so forth. The worst is the
external moralization of philosophy, the logic of which is roughly
the following: ‘I am a philosopher, and as such I devise great
metaphysical systems; I am also however a good human and am
concerned about all the disaster in this world. We must struggle
against this disaster ...’ Derrida is weakest at that point when, in the
middle of his book Spectres of Marx, he becomes entirely
unphilosophical and lists the disasters in this world in ten points.
Unbelievable! I didn’t believe my eyes as I read that; but there they
were, ten points; and they attested to an extreme lack of though:
unemployment and dropouts without money in our cities; drug
cartels; the domination of the media monopolies and so forth. As if
he wanted to give the impression of being not merely a great
philosopher but also a warm-hearted person. Excuse me, but here I
can think of only a relatively fatal comparison: at the end of works
of popular literature there is usually a short description of the author
— and in order to valorise their curriculum a little, one adds
something like: ‘she currently lives in the South of France,
surrounded by many cats and dedicated to painting ...’ That is more
or less the level we’re dealing with. It almost prompts me therefore
to add something mischievous to my next books: ‘In his private life
he tortures dogs and kills spiders’, simply in order to push this
custom ad absurdum. But I want to go on: if we philosophers are
asked for our opinion, often all one wants in truth is that we
introduce ourselves. Our knowledge is then a type of vague
reference that gives an authority to our opinions. It is just as if one
asked a great author what he likes to eat, and he answers that Italian
cooking is better than Chinese cooking. We should therefore only
concern ourselves with what is inherent to philosophy.
What is then the role of philosophy? Here we confront a paradox:
philosophy hardly ever, and least of all in its creative periods, plays a
normal role in the sense that it is merely philosophy. Here are a
couple of unrelated facts: in the nineteenth century, literature in
some nations, like Hungary and Poland, often played the role of
philosophy; for example, the philosophical or ideological vision that
lay at the foundations of the national movement was formulated to a
large extent in literature. Even in the United States, for example, in
ninety-nine out of one hundred cases, you won’t find so-called
continental philosophy in the philosophy faculties (and that is to be
taken literally: out of 4,000 US colleges with a philosophical faculty,
only fifteen to twenty of them have any real representation of
continental philosophy). Instead, we find it in cultural studies, in
English, in French and German departments. If you want to read
Hegel and Badiou, you must paradoxically choose comparative
literature with majors in French and German. If, on the other hand,
you do research on the brains of rats and perform experiments on
animals, you go to the philosophical faculties. But it is not
uncommon that philosophy occupies the place of another subject:
when, for example, communism fell apart, philosophy was the first
place in which the resistance was formulated. It was more political
than ever at this point of time. However, here you might like to
object that great German philosophy was nothing but philosophy.
Absolutely not! Already with Heine, not just with Marx, we know
that philosophy was the German substitute for the revolution. That
is the dilemma: you can’t have both. It is false to claim that the
French could have had philosophy if only they had been clever
enough. Conversely, the non-appearance of the revolution was the
condition for German philosophy. My idea is now the following:
perhaps we have to break with the dream that there is a normal
philosophy. Perhaps philosophy is abnormality par excellence. Thus
I would read Badiou’s theory. (We, Badiou and I, embrace each
other, but in reality we hate each other. Our usual joke is: if I take
power, he goes to the camps; but that is another story.) I also follow
explicitly his thesis about the conditions of philosophy: that
philosophy is by definition excessive; that it literally exists only
through the excessive connection to external conditions, which are
of either an amorous, political, scientific or artistic nature.
Lastly, another critique, even if a very friendly one: our different
assessments of Kant could represent a disagreement between us.
And I would like to ask you, perhaps only rhetorically, if you are not
also of the opinion that there is — despite the many terrible things
that I too have said about a specific neo-Kantianism — something in
Kant that is worth saving. What? What interests me in philosophy
above all is that moment of foreignness to which you refer. Isn’t
foreignness at the beginning of philosophy? The so-called Ionian
philosophers of nature emerged in what is now Turkish Asia with
the development of commodity production. I don’t want to draw
here the vulgar-Marxist parallel that commodity production means
abstraction and that his abstraction of the commodity lies at the
foundation of philosophical abstraction; where I want to steer out
interest is towards this moment of foreignness that emerges through
displacement; that philosophy — this is what Heidegger wants to tell
us — was from the very beginning not the discourse of those who
feel the certainty of being at home. It always required a minimum of
breakdown of the organic society. Ever since Socrates we always
meet over and again this otherness, these holes, and interestingly we
can even discover the foreign in Descartes — and thus show up his
slanderers. In the second section of the Discourse on Method there
is, I think, his famous remark about how he discovered through
travel not only the foreignness of other customs, but also that one’s
own culture is not less strange, even laughable, if one views it with
other eyes. That is in my opinion the zero point of philosophy.
Every philosopher adopts this place of displacement.
And now my question to you: I’m tempted here to rehabilitate the
too often lightly taken Kantian concept of cosmopolitan civil
society. This concept, I believe, must be brought into connection
with Kant’s differentiation between public and private use of reason,
whose particularity consists in running contrary to intuition: what
Kant names the private use of reason regards the work of civil servants
in the state apparatus. Intellectual debates, even when they are
conducted in private, he calls on the other hand the public use of
reason. What is Kant getting at? The private is for him, I believe, in
the first instance the particular community rooted in a place. Kant’s
idea, however, is that we as intellectuals should engage in the
position of the singular universal; thus, a singularity that immediately
participates in universality, since it breaks through the idea of a
particular order. You can be a human immediately, without first
being German, French, English, etc. This legacy of Kant is more
relevant today than ever. The idea of an intellectual debate that
breaks through the particular order belies the conservative doctrine
according to which only the complete identification with one’s own
roots makes it possible to be human in the emphatic sense of this
word. You are completely human only when you are completely
Austrian, Slovenian, French, and so forth. The fundamental message
of philosophy, however, says that you can immediately participate in
universality, beyond particular identifications（巴迪厄、齐泽克《当代社会中的哲学》）. 
