齐泽克：为什么我反对幸福；幸福是错乱的
=============================
发布时间：2010-02-09 11:35
 《欢迎到真实的沙漠来》第59页：在拉康的意义上说，幸福基于主体的不能和不准备真实面对他所欲望的结果：幸福的代价是：主体必须卡在其欲望的前后不一贯中。在我们的日常生活中，我们总是假装在追求我们其实根本不想要的东西，所是，最终，最糟的事莫过于我们真的得到我“正式地”“官方”地在追求的东西了。幸福所以说是内在地虚伪的：幸福来自我们对于那些我们并不真正想要的东西的梦想。
所以，齐泽克认 为，最虚伪的幸福就是天主教许诺的那种幸福，以《音乐之声》里所追求的那种为代表，这电影是梵蒂冈推荐的十大电影之首。它代表人人都公开认为应当于追求，而且假装已经在追求，但真得到了就要叫苦连天的那种幸福。
电影里的女教师那就是于丹呀！她在教我们如何才能幸福。但你倒是真的去睡睡她试试看。.
那么，于丹自己的幸福怎么办？她的幸福就是她能将这种的她自己都不相信的错乱强加给虔诚的粉丝。她的幸福也是错乱的，但她能变态到让这种错乱发作，将这样的释放暂时当作幸福。她吸幸福的毒，她两小时就犯瘾，我们二十四小时犯瘾，所以她能教我们如何幸福。
Another story that I like, you know Huntington’s disease, cases where you really have radical genetic determinism. There it’s clear…not to be sadistic, but you can analyze my blood, and afterwards you can tell me ”you will be healthy for three years, after that you will develop the first symptoms, half a year later you will be dead.” You can even determine in advance not only that I will die but when. The catch is that the doctor who invented this test is afraid to apply it to himself. It’s interesting that the only people who have Huntington’s disease and accept the test are those who have children and want to know if they can provide financially for them. Then I ask myself a simple question: From the opportunistic standpoint of happiness, what would I have done? And I found only one solution. Suppose you are a doctor and a very good friend of mine. Analyze me, but don’t tell me anything, if you learn that three months from now the illness will start, a month before, kill me in my sleep, without me knowing. That would be the closest you can come to happiness, but it doesn’t work, because every time I saw you I would know, so let’s go to the end, an anonymous state agency doing this to all of us without us even knowing it, this is the solution of happiness.
Oh really? Well then that’s American terrorism. My point is that this book series is wonderful, it was published by a publishing house which specializes in books which are kind of the obscene truth of these books like ”How to make your life happy”, etc. The other titles are ”How to take revenge on your enemies”, ”How to beat someone with bad rumors” and so on. I love those books precisely because again they deal with real-life situations, the only problem is that you never encounter them. In bestseller advice books it’s things like ”What you do when an alligator bites your leg” the idea is that you tap him on the nose because it automatically…”or what to do when a hungry lion attacks you” it’s simply, unfortunately, you must have a jacket, you open it, lions don’t think in depth terms, so they think you are much bigger and turn around. What I mean is that it’s very mysterious, the success of these books, I think there’s a deep, almost progressive agenda in it, namely, let me ask you a question: which was the only American movie to have a spectacle of working-class solidarity? It was that otherwise very boring movie ”The Perfect Storm”. It tells us a lot about today’s situation that we need an extreme catastrophe in order to be able to imagine at all a kind of elementary working-class solidarity.
I think it’s the same for happiness. I can imagine someone wanting to be happy consciously, and nonetheless being happy, but just not on the same level. I’m a little bit skeptical, maybe you didn’t have this in mind, about the idea that you can only be happy if you don’t think about it, it’s lost innocence, the moment you reflect about it you are no longer happy…The ultimate proof that things are not as simple as that is that it’s like in Charles Dickens novels. I love Dickens, but it’s this hypocrisy, this love for the small, poor people who are happy, I think that the fact you can be happy without knowing it is mostly the dream of the people who feel very well not being happy and if you ask them ”Ok, would you exchange places with that guy who is supposed to be happy”, they never would accept it….
